
--- Page 1 (OCR) ---
THE

RATNAVALI
sRi aAnSHA-DEVA.

EDITED

With an exhaustive Introduction, a new
Sanskrit Comm., Various Readings,
a literal English Translation, N
copious Notes and useful 3
Appendices.
BY ‘
M. R. KALE, 2a,
Author of ‘A Higher Sanskrit Grammar,’
‘SAMityc 4rasamgraha, ‘A Smaller Sanakrit Grammar,’
* de. ke.
SECOND EDITION, REVISED.

GOPAL NARAYAN & Co,
Booksellers & Publishers,



--- Page 2 (OCR) ---
CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGCIGAQ
LIBRARY, NEW GELHLL.
Aca, No, f. so

All Rights Reserved by M. K. Kile.

Printed by U. 8. Deole at the Bombay Vaibhay Pross, Servants of

Indin Society's Home, Sandhurst Rood,
Axo

Published by V. N. & D. V. Mulgsokar, Proprietors,

Gopal Narayan & Con Booksellers, Kalbadevi Road, Bomber.

sruor, Bombay



--- Page 3 (OCR) ---
PREFACE 4,..
First. Editi
This.edition of ‘\’rl, HarshaDeva's Ratndvall ‘is
prepared on the same lines,as my edition of the
Nagananda two years ago, with a wiew to supply the
University student with a text-book that will meet all
his requirements. Care has also been taken to make |
the book useful to the general reader as well. A brief
but sufficiently exhaustive new commentary in San-
skrit has been written, xs there was no suitable ancient
comm. available on this play. Another feature of this
edition is the Introduction wherein all that has been
known of the author and the play has been put to-
gether for rendy reference and systematic study. The
» figures of speech and the various technicalities of
Sanskrit dramaturgy are not given (except in a few
cases) in the Notes, as they are not of much use to
junior University students. They are, however, point-
ed out in the commentary. I have used the editions of
Messrs. V. S, Ghate and Joglekar, and the Nirn ed, and
the available Calcutta editions, and 1 um beholden to
the editors of all these. But my special thanks are
duc to S'istrl Nigudkar whose edition was useful to me
in writing out the comm., and Prof. Ray's excellent
edition of the play from which I got many useful
hints. Any suggestions for improvement &c, will be
‘gratefully welcomed.

BomBay, June roar. M. R. KALE.

Second Edition.

This is mainly a revised reprint of the first, with
| "a few changes here and there.

Bomsay, Aprit r9as.



--- Page 4 (No text found) ---

--- Page 5 (OCR) ---
4

INTRODUCTION.

I, THE SANSKRIT DRAMA!

Wo shall begin with a brief outline of the general strac-
ture and arrangement of the Sanskrit drama, without «
knowledge of which the technical remarks on the construction
of the present play horo, as woll as those mado in the Noto,
will not be intelligible to the general reader,? Poetry in
Banekrit, from its inheront nature, as apart from ite inteineie
merit, is divided into two kinds—gew ‘what is eapable of being
seen or exhibited,’ and -qsq ‘what eva only be heard or chanted.”
The drama falls under tho Grst division, ‘Ripaks’ is the
gonoral term in Sanskrit for all dramatic compositions, whtob
also comprises a subordinate class called Upa-rdpala, ‘The
Répaka,# which has Rasa or Sentiment for its substratum, is
divided into ten olastos, ois, ares amptt ator: nga Fear |
saritranesrdt dieaiggrant eff w. Of the Upa-rdgakes or Minor
‘Dramas there aro eighteon spociee, the most important of whic
are Néfild, such as the Ratnivall, the Viddhadalsbhet
&o,, and Trofaka, such as the Vikramorvadiya &2,

Having thus disposed of the divisions into which the
whole of tho sconio art is eapsble of falling, we turn to the
principle of division among the Rapakar themselves, which is

1 Tho first two Scotions are nearly the samo as those
prefixed to the Nag.

2 The information given here has been mainly culled
from the Dav‘arGpake, ‘Tho minor particulars not noticed
here will be found in my Sahityasdrasangrabs (Nir. Ed. )

8 smenaetaial ei eradieds 1 ees ccantarediee
Terra DR, eraasatris eq aga Ag: | ereqidqahreR,
Natya is another and perhaps a wider term for the drama oF
the dramatic art, and is so called because it represents the
Alfforent situations in (the scones presented by ) life, The rage
s the founder of the ecfence of music and dramaturgy,
styled the Nétys-Séstra, Nétya is also called
‘Ripa inasmuch as it has dris'yatd or the capability of being
eon, and Rapaka inasmuch as its subject-matter is represented
bby actors assuming partionlar characters.



--- Page 6 (OCR) ---
(6)
threstolé'—(1) weg or the Plot of the play; @) fat or the
Hore, and (3) 7 oF the Sentiment, ‘hove threo wre the
cave! constituents, nay, the vory lifecblood, of overy drama
fie piece, Hach of these wo ball sooointly desl with im is
order.

1 VASTU on THE PLOT.

Vastu ia primarily of two kinds: omfarfew oF Prinsipal?
and grafipm or ‘Acooseary.’ The Principal is that whi
velater to the chief charactors or tho persons concerned with
the eesential interest of the pieoo, and porvades the whole
arrangement. ‘Tho Acoossary is thst which appesrs in far-
theranee of the main topic, and ix concerned with characters
Sther than tho Horo or the Heroine. This latter is of two
kinds, vis., Patdks and Proiarl. Patéhi or ‘Banner’ is an
apisode by whioh the progress of the plots illustrated, fusthered
tr hindered (a0 as to give additional intorost to it). Ibis of
Considerable length and sometimes extends to the very end of
@ play. ‘Tho Praeré is also an episodiesl incident—of
Timited duration and minor importance—, one in which the
principal cbaractora take no part. Besides these two, there are
Unree other elements roquisite for the development of the plot.
‘Those are yer or the soed, faeg or the drop, and si oF the
final issue, Bije? ie the circumstance leading to the ultimate
fond briefly stated, which, as tho plot develops, bours maltitfa-
ious reruits, and which ia, at it were, the soed of the plot
‘Bindu’ in what cements a break in the plot caused by the
introduction of some other incident, Xérya is the final objeot
of the plot which being attained the whole is Sinished, The
fave are technically called the Arthaprakritis ( srdqema: )-

‘The Vastu, which ie thus divided into five clases, may

again be divided into throo clases according to the source of,

itederivation, It may be borrowed from history or tradition,
or it may be Sictitious, or mixed, 4.¢. partly drawn from
history and partly the ereation of the post's fancy. A Nétake
belongs to the first olats, a Prakaraps to the second,

‘As regards {ts developmont a dramatiy plot has five stages
or conditions called Avssthés, ‘hey are (1) aitten beginning

Teg Her ceetet aE:

2 eeiiftee etasie Meander |

8 sre RST ProgrsBewreTs |

yw


--- Page 7 (OCR) ---
Ct]

or totting on foot of the enterprise, (2) ai effort, (8) sreatat
prospect of success, (4) faanft certain attainment through
‘tho removal of obstasles, and (5) qutay obtainment of the
desired object. While thote five stages are in progress there
must be some links to connest them with the principal and
subordinate parts of the main action ( tho episodes ond
incidents ), These are called the Sandhis or junctures. Thoy
are five in namber, answorlng to the five dréhaprakyitis, each
of which they join with its corresponding stage, vit) Ew
(Protasis or tho opening jancturo), afigre (Bpitasis), wi (Oata-
stuse), randt (Peripatela), aud Prdgor (Catastrophe), also called
saagit or suert. Thus MukhasamdAi is tho combination
of the Bfja and A’rambba, i. ., whorcin the seod ie sown, £0
to epouk, with all its Rasas. In tho Pratimukha there is the
means (yatnz) to the chief end, as originally implied by the
‘Bijs in the Mukha which herein sprouts up. In the Gardke
‘hero is attainmont and non-attainment of the desired end,
implying a farthor sprouting up of the original Bija. There
fire impediments, but the main plot gains ground under
‘The dvamard/asamdhi is that in which the seed
attains « more Inxuriant growth then in the Garbha, being
accompanied by Nigatépti of the end, but whose final result is
postponed further off by frosh impediments of various sorts,
as in the Sikuntala the King’s forgetting Sak. after marrings
‘owing to Durvésas’ curse, The Vireahaza or consummation
is the harmonious combination of all tho aforonad parts in the
final catastrophe

The enbject-matter, whether historical, fotitious, or
‘mixed, is from its inherent nature capable of atwotold division.
It is divided into (1) qua, dotorving to be suggested or
implied only, as being of a dry and otherwise unit charscters
and (2) eqqrasa, fit to be ropresented and heard as being highly
tontimontal and pleasing, Tho suggestions or implications are
made in ive ways—fiewerqioargreatgreanaeas: |. (1) For
Vishkambha soo Notes, Act 1. (2) CA@liAd is the euggestion
of some incident from behind the Scones (3qe%). (@) Am
‘svgre! is one whorein is suggested by the aotors at the time
of their departure the connexion between the Act finished
and the one to bo commenced, which othorwise would lock
disoonneoted, as the epetch of Kimandakl and otlions at the

T ograairend ferrets



--- Page 8 (OCR) ---
(8)

end of the Srd Act of the Mél,-M&dh. (4) srgreait! covsists in
implanting the teed of the subject-matter of an Act in the
previous Act before it has drawn to its cloro, so that the Act
following is a continaation of tho one preceding; 6.9. the sixth
Act of the Stk., the gorm of whioh is cast at tho end of the
ffeh Act; Milay. IT. and Mél-MGih, IT, aro other instancon
(5) For dig eco Notes, Act II.

The subjoot-mattor is farther divided into thee kinds—
eisier or gare, spars or eTaTt, and Prams. The Inst
in of two kinds, garam and aqaiitae (which arocxplained in
tho Notes ). Independent of these divisions there is one
called saprsrarfan ( srptit ) or Speech from the Void.

‘The atyles or modes of action ( gya: ) to be followed in
4 drama are fourin nusaber, eis. wpre rere Mi? wieeeateadt ga |
tir OR state ate: wast wrest. OF theso tho Kuidikl (used in
the Nétiké) consists of mesic, dusucing and love-sports, assist~
ing the devolopment of Grliigéra, and is delightful by that and
from the fascinating dresses worn by women, ( Ses 8.-D., VI.
124), Tt has four eiigas, viz. (1) a or polite plessuntry, (2)
aiegst ( ovsy according to D.-R. ) or development of Lovo,
@) wHeare or the distant indication of Lovo, and (4) wit% or
covert action for the furtherance of love (quraradlan®
emteran ta andes areear aemeaeeTRATTT )

2 NETA’ on THE HERO.

‘Tho Herols required to be modest, decorous, comely, munk-
foent, civil, of sweet address, eloquent, sprang from a noble
family, &0.? Heroes are mentioned to be of four kinds, viz.
Mietere, GiesPee, Scaten and Yiitga. « Dhtrodiuea) oF the
Hero of sublime qualities, is oxe who is magnanimous, patient,
not given to boasting, self-possessed, of firm resolve, whos:
high epitit is concealed and who is trae to his engagement,
‘We are not concerned with the otter three oluses of Heroes

1 sganengra obra The distinetion,
however, between an AAkisya and an Adkévatéca, is considered
by come us merely Imaginary. Vidvandtha actually aupplauta
the latter by Aitkamakbs which he defines as that where in
one Aot the substancs of all the other Acts is sugested,

2 Rr (eAie greens cy: dg: Cord Teale erie:
Ratt gu saegeeneatrarserarreniea: | xt roe Aue
mrernge arite:  Seeraet wienemremar arate



--- Page 9 (OCR) ---
(9)

here. Each of thete Heroes may bo of one or other of four sorts,
He may be gh or ‘gallant,’ é, ., equally devoted to many
women, though principally attached to one; or qa ‘sly, 4. ¢,
‘one who being attached to one lady, covertly acts ine way
unpleasant to hor; or ho may be ye ‘bold,’ openly making
his prefossions to another, and not ashamed even when re-
proached; or lastly, he may be erga ‘favourable,’ devoted to
ono Heroine only. The Wittre Hero has eight manly quali-
ties—srar, fare, ang’, mete, 24, tara, anfter ond sitgrd,

Among the assistants of the Hero the principal is the diag,
the hero of the Patdka or episode, clever in discourse, devoted
to his master, and a little inforior to him in qualities, Next
comes the feexq, his constant companion, whote buefne
consists in the ropartees of wit, in helping his frlend in hi
lovo-intriguos, and thus assiasing in tho goveral dénouement of
tho play. The third, and of equal rank with the Viddebaka,
is the (42, who knows oue art only end is thereby usefal to the
Hero, ‘Tho Hero thus equipped may still take into his service
ministers of stato and ministers of religion, ascetics, allies &e.,
1s well as ouuuchs, mutes, barbarians (Yavanss ) &o, Some-
times there may be a Rival-Horo called afaaram, who is ave
ricious, bold, impetucus, criminal and of evil conduct,

‘The Néyiké or the Heroine, who must be possessed of qual
tes similar to those of tho Hero, fs of throo kinda, Sho may be
tho wife of the horo (eftar), a Si:4in the Uttar.; or one belong-
ing to another (stray or qzsijar), of a common woman (gTaTeat
or qrarengfi) as Vasantasoud in the Mich, The qrarat may be
a maidon or tho wifeof another. Batthe latter must not be intro-
Aacod as tho Heroine ina play?, ‘The maiden’s love, however,
better helps the Resa, and a therefore the most favourite
theme with meny Sanskrit poets, Furthor divisiont and eub-
divisions of the Néyidé aro not introduced here, as they have
very little to do with the construction of the drama, For her

Leaver erarcoehife agent auf far

2 sreaeht weastar v arrarartwee Te «We may observes
however, to the honour of Hindu drama, that the Perahiys
or the who is the wife of another person, is never to be made
‘the object of dramatio intrigue; » prohibition that would have
analy cooled the imagination, and curbed tho wit, of Dryden
snd Oongrove.”—Wilton, Hindu Theatre, Vol. 1, Abu



--- Page 10 (OCR) ---
[10]

Assistants the Heroine may have « weft, grat, wad, wiMeATE!
‘and others, possessing qualitios corrospending to those of the
friends of the Hero.

8 RASA on THE SENTIMENT.

aca ie thet lasting impression of feeling produced to his
overwhelming delight in «msn of pootie susceptibility by
the proper action of the VidAdvas and the Anubhioas, as woll ns
the Séttoika bhévas and the Fya8hiehéribhsoas!. Bhava (ora) or
‘Peoling’ is the complete pervasion of the heart by any emo-
tion, whether of pleasure or of pain, arising from the object
under eight. Vibhiva (f@art ) or an Excitant is that which
boing perceived nourishes tho main sentiment. It is divided
into (1) Alembana, that which is, as it wore, the support or
eubttratam of the Resa—the person or thing with reference to
whom or which a sentiment ariso#—, uch as the Hero or the
Heroine, and (2) Tddfpana, or what excites or enhances (adds
to the development of the sentiment, such as the moos, the
beauties of the vernal season, &o.; and beaaty, decorations, &o
of the principal characters, in the cane of appre. Anubhdoa or an
Eusuant is the outward manifestation of the intornal feeling
through the eyes, face &e. ‘Tho Séttvika or natural bAdwas are
8 sub-division of Anuéhdva, and aro montioned as cight in
aumber—enimertiana: Bg Reolieeg | ceterirendy |, The
Fysthickiris or the Accestaries aro thote bkdeaa which are not
strictly confined to any Rasa, but appearing and disappearing
like waves in the ooean, thoy servo as feeders to the prevailing
sentiment and strengthen it in different ways, Sthayibhdva
(eaifirarr ) oF the Permanent Sentiment? of a composition is
fono—‘the ocean melting all salt into wateP—which not
boing interrupted by any sentiment contrary or akin to its
nature ocourring at intorvals, converts all of them into ite own
nature, Now, 1 Zasa would prove contrary to auothor if the
‘sir or substratum of both wore the same, But as agit
(principal) and ag (snbordinat), a eg may be mixed with one
oF more of cthors,

1 fratgnter aiebeteaiie 1 srdieara: erat
eardt are ce: Raa: W GEG ane eeltabrerarraae! SeHTTTAT
as frat artigo a sreperideaeerigs et fea gar
Rereg sITeT TAT

2 favaiteedt qiiieoay ag: erent agerere

pare OTOUET:

A



--- Page 11 (OCR) ---
=A

cuj

‘Thore are cight Sthiyibbévas, cf, gre, de, BW) sete,
3a, BgraT, and fey on which sre based rospectively the
sentiments—apgre the Erotio, grey the Comic, wear the Pathetic,
ag the Farious, dx the Heroic, sarap the Terrible, dew the
Loathsome, and sigq the Marvellous. ‘There is # ninth senti-
mont, that of arg tho Quiotistic, having ga or tranquillity
for its Sthtyibbiva, But itis not suited to dramatio pur-
poses aud rarely ooaus as « main sentiment in s drama, Of these
ight sentiments gyi¢ aud gres, aie and srg, frwes and ware,
and dig and emt are akin to each othor, a9 they proceed from the
saine condition of the mind. As we aro hero mainly concerned
with tho Brotio, thut being the prevailing sentiment in most
Banskrit plays, wo will eay something about it hero. gyypre it
mainly divided into faqaey or Love-in-separation and quit oF
Lovo-in-anion. The foraer, the Dadardpaka snb-divides into
two kinds, stda tie Non-consammation of Marriage, and
futiin the Separation of the lovers deep in love after marriage.
‘Tho former, which arises from the dependent position of ono or
the otter of the parties or through distance or through the
intervention of advorte fate, has ton stages, si¥erg, fear de,
mentioned in the com, farar oconrs through Ara, Tare or tome
such cause; ara ‘jealous anger,’ arises from a breach in the
duties of love (wore) and may be on both sides (the Nayak
rately Afdni). This sr hos several varictics
fvafara, sigaireart &o. It is capable of being
dispelled in six ways—qrear Bf gia vegerceredt:—and is
called se, ay oF maT aceorling to the greatness or the small
of the effort roquired to make the Nayika give it up. ate
is whon tho two lovers aro in tho enjoyinent of each other's com.
pany, ongaged in looking at each other, kissing esoh other &e,

4 THE GENERAL CONDUCT OF THE NATAKA,
Every dramatio piece opens with a Prelude or Prologue
lf introduced by what is called the
Néndi, ‘This Vandf according to some wust euggest the giay
of tho whole plot. Tho Sitradhtra may sometimes retire
after the recital of the Néndl, in which onse another actor,
salled eurqw ( for he establishes as it worw the topie of, the
play ), takes his place, In the Prelude, which may begin. with
‘a brief allusion to tho post's literary attainments, his goes.
ogy, fe, tho Sttmabirs or the SthApake suggeste, the exb-



--- Page 12 (OCR) ---
Ce]

Joot in the form of the Bija, or by a simple beginning, or by
naming the character about to enter, as in the Sékuntala. He
swust please tho audiouoe with swost nonge dosoriptive of somo
season and couched in the Bharati Vritti. The graraar is of
two kinds—(1) w@rwar as in the Ratn,, and @) sige, io which
the Satradbéra holds conversation with tho actress or his aeri
ants, bearing on the sabject to be introduced. ‘This latter is
of thros kinds, of which ono is wajaifaqa. When the entry
of e chartoter is directly indicated by the Sitradhtra, saying
“Hero he enters,’ that is Proyogétidaya,

‘The Prelude being over, the ples is commenced, being
horoafter atrangod and exhibited in the manner indicated in
the three foregoing Sectio 5, ‘The whole mattor should be
woll determined and divided into Acts ond Scones. A.
Nitaka may consist of from five to ten ccts, Tho Hero
should be of the Dhfroditta class, The Sentiment should be
MIT oF Mie (oF sometimes gem), othors belng introduced
a8 conducive to its developmont. Nothing should be intro-
duood into tho play which either misbesooms the Hero or ie

jsoordant with the main sentiment: An Act must not be
tirosomely long, should be fall of Zasa;and introduced by Vish.
Aanbhaka te , scoording to nocessity, Its close js marked by
the exit of all charasters. Such ineldeate at journeys, ma
sacres, wars &e,, should not be reproseutod in a play; they
may only be indicated. ‘Tho death of the Hero must never bo
extibited. ‘This acoouats for the somewhat monotonous char.
aoter of Sanskrit plays, and the absence of tragodics in San.
skrit!. The play should end, as it began, with a Benediction or

1 Wilson observes—°They (the Hindu plays) never offer
‘slamitous conclusion, which, a8 Jonson remarks, was enough to
constitute Tragedy in Shakespeare's days ; and although they. pro-
pote fo excite all the emotions of the human breast, terror and pity
included, they never effect this object by leaving a painful impree
tion upon the mind of the spectator. ‘Tho Hindus in fact have ng
TragedyiomnTho absence of tragio catastrophe in the Hinde
dcamss in not merely an unconscious omiasion ; suche oateatrophe ia
probibited by « positive rule, ‘The oonduot of what may be termed
‘the classical drama of the ‘exeinplary snd dignified. Nor
{nite moral purport neglected ; and one of their writers declare
in an illustration familiar to ancient and wtodorn poetry, that the
chief ond of the Theatr is ta disguise, by the iasidions sweat, the
anpalstable, but salutary bitter, of the cup.’

ft

<


--- Page 13 (OCR) ---
“a

[13]

ptayer, called the Bhsratavikya, whioh is ropoated by the
principal personages and which contsing an expression of
thoie wishes for genoral prosperity aud happiness, The
Uuity of interost or action must be maintained throughout

As regards the language to be used ina piece, the Horo
nd the higher characters spoak in classical Sanskrit, while
females and the minor charactors speak in tho different Prakeit
diateots.

Tho student will seo from the forogoing sketch, that the
characteristic poraliarities of the Indian Drama are mainly
throo—<(1) its paculiar etractare; (2)the absenoo of the distino-
tion between Comedy and Tragedy; and (5) the diversity of
languages to bo spoken by the characters, ‘The above-mentioned
general charactoristics of s Nataka bolong with cortain modi-
fications to the othor divisions of tho Rapaka as well.

Of the Upsrdpekas wo are concerned here with the
Nitikt alone, Wo therofore give bolow ite special features,

‘The Néfiké:—his i defined by the Séb{lya—Darpana
as: aniter area eareetiarar ages | seat ieeiereae
eurers@r TU: a eargeacgtetar deiawargara at | saree eure
auter aoderan it dave Reveat Bearers ofa: | RA weega
Saar meat qeiaat wot aE mae gu: Maat eA: 1 are
earebfirdr exealtaaits daa: ga: 1. The Natiké ehould bo based
on an invonted story, shoald consist of four Acts, and abound
in female charactors, Ite Horo should bo an illustrions King
and of tho Diiralalita, class. ‘The Heroine should be a
maiden of royal family ‘(or a colestial one)! newly touched
with Love, and should be either connected with the inner
apartmonts (at an attendant of the Queen), °F engaged in
musical practice, ‘Tho Hero thoold proseed in his love
sifair cautiously from foar of the Quoon, ‘The Queen should
bea grown-up Indy, bold, and also of royal family. he
should display hor indignation at every step, and the union
of tue lovers should depend on her consent, ‘The Kaitikl,
with all its four parte, must be the Vlas employed, end the
Sandhis should bo without the Vimaria (as explained by
the comm. ), ‘The principal Rasa should be Sridpara.?

2 fasar spa wateer | Dar'o-Képaks,
2 aperitsalt ware: | Did.
Bel 2



--- Page 14 (OCR) ---
[14]

‘The points of differoseo between a Nétaka and a
Nétika are:—(1) ‘The plot of a Nataka shonld be well-
known, i.e, derived in ite main features from history, while
that of a Natikt sould be mainly invented. (2) In the
former the Hero is Dhiroditta, whilo in tho lntier ho is
Dilralalite, (8) While a Nifake should havo many males
ongaged in important affairs, the Natiké should have many
females. (4) ‘Vo former should have one priueipel sentiment,
which may be either grt, oF ix, of Gen, while the lnttor
should have qare only. (5) A Natska may vonsist of five,
soven, oF oven ton Actes © Nétik of four only.

U1, THE Port.

‘The chronology of Sanskrit litorature has beon a porplox-
ing problem to scholars and antiquariaus, sad it is no wnususl
‘experlence for the #erlous student to have to face confusing
statements and many-sided argamsnts bofore ho ei roach «
safe conclusion about even tho most famous of Sanskrit
authors or their works, ‘The authorship of tho thros plays,
‘tho Priyadartiki, the Ratudvali and tho Néginands, has not
esoaped the common fate, and hss provided the epeoulative
oritfe with a most conveniont dumping ground for all kinds of
fancitul theories. ‘Thore aro somo who doubt, in th» frst place,
‘whether all the throo dramas wore written by the ssmo porson,
tnd are inelined to differentiate betwoon the autaor of the
Néghnanda, and that of the Priysdariiké aud- the Ratnévalt,
Some have believed that Bévabbgita, the author of the
Kidambarl and the Harshaoharita, wrote the Rataévall also;
while others havo pat forth with insistonce the olsims of
Dhivaka or Bhisa, ‘Tradition, howover, has been oonsistent
in atoribing the wuthorahip of all tho throo plays to King
Sri-Harsha, or Harshs-Deva, of Kausuj. Scholars bave
generally accopted this view, and it is one with whioh, it
might bo stated at tho outeat, wo ato in entire agceoment,
But questions havo boon raised about tho identity of this
Harsha, since it is another common festure of all similar
inguirlos that thoy aro hampored by a plurality of Sanskrit
writers! boating the samo, or similar, names and titles, "And

1 Compare in this connexion the existence of a number of poote
boating tho names KAlidisa, Dapdin, RAjas'ekhars, and many



--- Page 15 (OCR) ---
Be
if
|

Sa

ies oe

[18]

the view has even been held that the royal personage was
merely a patron, the real author of the plays being some post
at his court, who wrote them and presented them to the public
as those of his distinguished benefactor.

Tt Is not easy to unravel this entanglement without elear-
ing the ground before us by examining if there is any internal
evidence leading up to any definite statement, Happily we
fre hero ou a Grmer basis thon in the eato of othor poote and
writers, who have not deigned to vouchsafe any information
about themselves. ‘The Prastyani of the Rétnayall ( p.
5) reada—

ETOTE: reenter | oe cee nga TET ATT:
feat og: sbeggee oactresifer TaegeT Sw: | Vay
serena afgittr agicgcendwar cearelt aie areqt
‘SAT Br area siraatocar gar a gaara ee aa vel Te
SSSA TA: WEAN HTT WATTS Tae Tg]
ae FR tae ose MRtUNE Pager: OPE: ote.

Fromthisit is olear that, sinoe the Hime when the play
was originally composed, it has been reseived as the work of
King sedge (or moroly afte, if wo omlt tho royal title Deva).
And this is corroborated by similar Prologaes in the two
sister-dramas—

(1) qrare: u (afer) starg waetiee wagarearga are
fegarmta cre: ahetteer cartraita cae Se: | aa
sereariiar sigdite agivegeanrigar fraeftar ara arieet
war eet: stacteeat gar gy Ta eer aaaete Ue
etoagragngt: sqaran sete wauegas Tavera eT
arartaaean 1% ated Fagen: at ete,

—From the Priyadars'its, Aot I.

@) aotere: U sreatthrertor | scart eeateet exert erent
aeaniticarnte cra sirediteen oreateateat Urea Tw |
war serrenfiar hgtata seleeaIS RarearoutiaTe
rarest are are@ wt seMTTR: secant gH AG TART EERE
aq ate cm SRTMATTTIANTT: ETAT oA TETETEST
SAreeTAT RTT ATRTATERTA Ln noe ea PAGE: A oe,

—From the Négénanda, Act I,

Indeed, as would bo apparent on comparison, the three
Prologues aro almost indentical in their wording, end nono of
‘tho theorists has yet directly challenged their genuineness, or
‘the trath of the information therein conveyed, that: the



--- Page 16 (OCR) ---
C16]

‘King-Poot Srl-Harsha composed the threo drames
{nce of this evidence one is earprised to find Dr. A.B,
stating eat gorically:—“The sutborship of the Rat
Aisputed, bat it in absolutely impossible to decide thi

‘and the author must romain anorymous.” — (C

‘Sh MSS. in the Bodlein Librwry, Oxiord, 1009, p. 80) Our
first task, therefore, is divested towards ditcovering aud
fixing the identity of this 8'4f-Harsba,

‘Thero aro thros! woll-known Srf-Harshas known to
ancient Indian history. Ono is the author of the famous
Reuleerte wgreier in 22 Cantos, who also wroto sivieeia,
worraerary, AaMigarate, oT NRA, aTUTERTE TA, MTA
waits, faraferferg and eaafear. All theto works be
mentions in the concluding stanzas of tho toveral Cautos of
the Naishadhiyacharita, where he describes _himeelf as the son
of git and ayaaiedi. In one placs? ho describes himself, again,
fas receiving certala favours at the hands of his patron, the
King of Kinyakubja. This then is assuredly not the author
ofthe Ratuévall who is « King with a “ creas ea1ag.”
This fact alone is sufloient to disprove tho suppoted identity
of tho two, Moreover, the author of the Nuishadblyacharite,
it ho bad written any or all of those threo plays, would
cortainly have gloried himself by including tholr names, too,
in tho Iist which he so persistently prosees on our notice. Tt
should bo noted, again, that the Naishadbfyact
of tho 12th contury,? and is never quoted a the
on Indian rhetories, while Dhaniks, tho commentator of the
Davartpa, writing at tho end of the 10th century, quotest
frequently from all tho throo plays, ‘Tho author of the N.-Ob.
oonld not then, evidently, have writt@® them.

Another Harsha was the ruler of Kashmir between 1113
and 1185 A, D., and to him Prof. Wilson attributed the Ratnd-

1 ‘Thero are some minor authors who bore this name (2. gy
Birt-Harsha who wrote a commentary on the Gitagovinda). But they
are evidently wodern, and none of thom was 2 King.

2 arggeared eet rapt, N.~Ch. XXII. 155.

8 Seo Pandit Sivadalta’s Ed. of tho poem (Nirpayassgure
Prevs, 1894), Introduction p. 9. ‘This aria, the author of the
weeraerare, flourished under King Jayachandra of | Kanayj
(circa 1175),

4 Gee ihe English translation of the Das‘ardpa in the Colurabie
Univ. Indo-franian Series (New York, 1912), Introduetlon
pe xaxyi.



--- Page 17 (OCR) ---
2

—— oS CUCUCEU”Ct~*~“‘i‘

[17]

vall in the early days of Sanskrit ccholarship, Here certainly
wo have a King Harsha, but the dissovery of the extsterce of
tho quotations in Dhsnika’s commentary has laid this theory
finally at rest, and it is now forgotten.

‘There then remains the King Si-Harshe, better known,
4s Harshavardhana, of Kanaoj, originally of Thazosar, who
ust have beon the author of these plays, and to whom scholars,
both Indian and western, agree in ascribing them,

Tho reign of S'xf-Harsha or Harshavardhana, from 606
to 647 A. D., was ono of the brightest epochs in the history
of ancient India, Is is an epoch of which we possess detailed
and more or less trostworthy records, and the researches of
sntiquatian scholars hevo recently made further valuable
additions to our knowledge of Hartha’s political career, @
brief account! of which may be given here,

In the lattor part of tho sixth century the city of Than
(in the holy Isnd familiar to the A’ryans as Kurukshetra) was
Jed over by a King nemed Prabbakaravardba
yunger son was Harsha, His elder brothor was Rijya-
vardhana, the crown prince, who ascended the thronein 605.4.D.,
on the death of his father; but he did not live long to enjoy
hhis accession, having beon troncherously murdered by the
of Bengal whom he had sought ss sn ally in on expedition
against the ralor of Mulwa, Réjyavardhaua having died
without leaving an heir, his ministers finally chote Harsha
his ruooeesor (October, 608). The wisdom and fitness of thi
‘choice were proved sogn after by the enorgy and ability with
which Harsha conductéi himself in his new position, He first
planned a methodical system of conquest ( Dip-vijays ), with
the parpose of bringing the whole land under ono politieal
power, vit. his own. Within six years he had conquered largo
parts of the north-western regions and of Bengal, and
military strength at thie time oan be ganged trom the fact
that he could put in the field “60,000 war-clephants and

1. The stendurd account in Sanakrit is the Harsha-Chavita ot
BAna: ‘The account given by Pérkbt Ststet in is Marathi esay
fon aig (1911) and the aobolarly Iotroduetion ia Gajarktt prefixed
by Mr. K. HL. Dhmova to his Guj. transl. of the Priyadardika
(24 ed, 1912) are also very blpful, Consult eapecially. VA
Simith's Early Hitory of India (3rd ed, 1914) pp. 885-869, from
‘which mainly the above facts bave been compiled,



--- Page 18 (OCR) ---
(18)

100,000 oavalry,”” He thon reigned for thirty-five yours lovger,
most of which period was patsed in penceful development
fiud the perfecting of tho varlous schomes of administration
‘and in making occasional additions to bis already extensive
empire, Towards the ro extended
fovor the whole of the basin of the Ganges ( including Nepsl )
from the Himélaya to the Narmadé, besides Malwa, Gujarat
and Sauréshtra (he modera Kathiawar), His long career
of conquest was unbroken save for oue defeat, which he sus-
tained in 620 af the hands of Palaketin II, of the Obélukya
family. ‘Tho Chinese traveller Houon-Teang givos an eye-
witness's description of his civil administration, with which
ho was highly impressed. ‘Tho principal source of rovenue was
of course land revenue, other taxes being light and_nogligible
Crimes were rare, and on the whole the people wero prosperous
and contented. Harsha in aftor-life was strongly inclined
towards the quictistic teachings of Buddhiem, and he bimecit
lived like # Buddhist devoteo, Rest-houses (Dharma-s'élde),
religious establishments, and benevolent and charitable institu?
ns on the model of those of Adoks, were founded throughout
his kingdom, He held religious assemblies, once at Kanaud
and again at Prayiga, where ho freely geve away his wealth in
charity. Having conquered Assam (Kémaripa) he even
sent @ mission to Obina, between which country and India
there was constant commanication in those days, Harebe
iad in 646 (or 647) without leaving an heir. On his death
the throne was usurped by one of his ministers, ‘Tho removal
of his mighty personality soon plungedfho country in dixord
‘which rapidly made his oompact and solid state soon orambl
to picoes.

Hartha was known as qsafé-sfied, oF Harsh tho Para-
mount Sovereign. Ho earned that titlo for himself by his exten.
tive conquosts, and we have seen how, during the forty years of
his ralo, he devoted his energy to the efficient administration
of his wide dominions, Eduoation was developed, and litera-
ture and loarning flourished under government patronage:
‘Two of the most famous posts at his court were Bhyabhatte
tho author of the Kédambart, and Mayra, who composed. the
Saryadataka, ‘The King himself was a writer of considerable
‘Ae Mr. Smith ‘ays, “ Besides a grammatical work,
throo oxtant Sanskrit plays and sundry compositions in verve



--- Page 19 (OCR) ---
[19]

aro ascribed to his pen; and thero is no reason for hesitating
to believe that he bad at least a large share in their eomposi
tion for royal authors wore eot uncommon in ancient India,” *

Taken by iteelf tho reign of Harsha can be compared to
that of the groat Mogal Emperor Akbar, as regards the uni-
vorsal prosperity of the people, the efiolenoy of the adminis-
tration, and the encouragesient given to loarning and the éno
arts, Harsbe’s autograph has becn preserved on an inserip-
tion, and those interested might find it at p. $49 of Mr.
Smith's History. For noarly thirteen conturios, his plays have
continued to enjoy an extensive popularity,and have furnished
rhotorioians and litorary critics with models and illustrations
for their onnons, their position in Sanskrit literature being,
very high.

Coming now to the various conflicting theories, we do
not think there is any ground for urging that the samo hand
that wrote tho Priy. and the Ratn, could not have written the
@Nagdnanda, so that it ie necossary to provide the Nighaanda
With a differont authorship. This argument seems to havo
bbeon based on the general similarity of the subject-matter
of the first two plays, and ths totally distinct theme of the
Naghoonda, That is very slondor reed to rely upon; tor
nothing can provent an author trom choosing widely different
subjects for his works, if heis eo pleased. And in the plays
‘thomsolves there aro abundant traces and points of resemblance
that leave no doubt as to their all having emanated from
the same hand. ‘They are, in the boginning, the renga,
which agroo almost Wlerally with ono another; and the
yaareae at the end havo also the same ring of similarity
Many words, sentences snd idioms, are common to all the
plays, and thero we havo quoted in the Notes wherever they
oveur, Many verses aro similar in sentiment or in phraseology
(G,. the verso saftenirawigar &e. which oocurs both in the Priy.
and in tho Nég.), The wtq in Ratn, IT, rosemblos the
corresponding one in Nag. II. Apsrt fromthe resemblance in
words, incidents and ideas, the genoral simplicity of styl
‘and charastorization aro almost uniform in the three plays
‘nd the resder oan hardly remain unconvinced that these plays

1B. gy S'hdraka, Vis'kbedatta, Bhoje, Yavoyarmany, 4nd
others. (The Italjes in the quotution above are outs )es- 05



--- Page 20 (OCR) ---
C20)

‘were compoted by the samo author, however dissimilar the
subject of tho Naginandu! may be from that of the two
other plays,

Tt has boom vontended with great force and display of
ingenuity, that Kiog Harebavardhana did not himself write
those plays, but come poet at his court did it for him, and
this contention reats on a sentence in the Kvyaprakie’a of
Mammste (Usb. 1.) — sitetqaleardianiies eam.” Borning
money is stated thore to bo one of the objects in composing «
iterary work; and as an instance the case of are getting
money from sfig@ Is pointed out. The commentator Uddyo~
tokira oxplains—« ara: wits | a ME sttedarem rear wees
ag v4 eaaeiafe wfeeH I” ; and he is followed in this by some
other commentators, In some MSS. of tho Karynprakie'a is
found a variant, mrmginifee waa for wrawieariae wa, and
this canght the imagination of the Isto Dr. Hall, who was the
first to attribute the Ratnivalf to Béna, As it is, the whole
of this argument tums upon the explanations of the com-
mentators of the Kivyaprakééa, whom we need not implicitly®
follow; for there is another and a more uatural interpretation
of tho pastago in question, vis., that Dhivaka and other poots
got wealth from thelr (royal) patrons as a reward and as
mark of appreciation—and it is not necessary to suppose that
authorships wore transferred to the i
of such gifts, Sonsitive and honourable patrons themselves
would fight sby of eaoh wholesale transfers,

But, apart trom that, there is po ovldenco whatever,
internal or external, to believe (Xt Baga wrote the
Ratotvall, since his slyle, as seen in his prose works, is com-
pletoly romoved from that of tho dramas, Tho former is
highly ornate and olaborate, the latter is simplo and plain,
Moreover, why Baga should have sold the dramas only, and
rotained the Kidambarl, which wenld havo brought him a
prizeoly mm of money, would be a puzzle ; again, Bspa was in
sufficiently opulent circumstances, quite boyond tho necessity
which would drive an impeouniows author to bargain for the

1 Ae it ie well known thit arab showod « lesuing towards
Buddhisin towards the enil of his reign, wo can ensily anppose that
ths Pry. aud the Rata. were his eatlier works, while the Nig.
marks the boginaing of the Buddhistio tonor of bis thought.
development,



--- Page 21 (OCR) ---
[aj

sale of bis works including thelr authorship. De, Hall also
argued that the presones of the verse gioraeaearaft oto. both
in tho Ratefvall and in the Harshacharita proved Béna’s
anthorsbip of tho formor. But no such eerse eats in the
Harshacharita, and the learned doctor led scholars to follow &
wild-goosoctate for « tims, till the theory came tobe abandoned
‘as both hasty and unsound, Tt was resorved for an enterprising
scholar of South India, Mr. Nartyan Shastri, to purmue the
seemingly obsowre reference to ram in the Karyaprake:

passage, and to deduco some vory ingenious theories about tho
authorship of these plays. ‘The learned scholar’s conelusions
and arguments, if they are proved to be correst, would disturb
the chronology of many authors and make it neomsary to
revise and rewrite tho early history of Kavya literature; but
for reasons shortly to be stated, wo must say wo are ansble
to concur in Mr, Shéstrt"s conclusions, Mr. Sbéstrl ident
‘are with the famous poet urg, who iz eulogized by Kélidiss,
and thirtoen of whoto dramas were recently discovored in

Travancore ; ho also identifies the g¥ of the Preludes of there

plays with a cortain king VikramAditya whom he places
botiwoon 552 and 457 B, O.; and he ascribes the authorship of
our plays toBhésa, a court-poct of this Sel Harsha-Vikramas
ditya, thas carrying back the ago of the plays by some ten
conturios oF 0!

‘This odidce of conjecture and theory is based one quota-
tion given by Mr. Shéstri as from the efyfangt of craze which
rons as followe:—

ret ORR are: Tere TTE: BR
‘Roar anfewilergraacar: FHT: EET 4 |

goat qreigarst mont: erase CeaTET:
rage wee weed NAT eT aEshe BH

weet q sieerea a dowgaiaar |

sneerste ie aRre: wdlataieroreR, 0

ang) wrda efaar aifes Prersferar |

fatedes caged sea a freqdiar 0

ee warned 24 cenaiee Crore |

qumnwsrfaeas agraemadT Hat

araracé ware wea aftelawat |

sega: eeRTR TER FU

sqrTerNt TraTTCTTeRTT |

adler aeararar: aforgate@rr® & 0



--- Page 22 (OCR) ---
C2]

shraeteararses aargr Perret

nreregete wee aT A PHAN

mrqareeetesit ee: Pe weTs

AATEAETET TERIA TAH Ut
Diaveka, it, ‘e washerman,? was a title by which, no
oubt, Bhésa was known, as it {senid he was a washermen
by profession, Bat since Bhisa preoeded EAliddes, the
scifeaa in the quotation above cannot bo identised with the
Hing Horshavardhana of tho seventh century, and hence My.
Shastst discovered an earlier Harsha, from a verso of the
Rajatareipgin8? Mer. Shdate forthor argued from the similerity
in idiom and idons botween the Priyadarsiké and tho Males
Tignizitra, Uoat tho former play of Bhisn mast have served
ts emodel for KAliddsa’s work. Tho latest supporter of the
theory of Bbisa’s suthorship of the plays is Prof, 8. Mf.
Paranjpe? of Poone,

This nob poteiblo so easily to brush aside the quotation
given by Mfr, Shistrl, Bat the manner in which lt was oF:
Ghally offered is highly suspiclous, and orenter in on mind
7 doubts whether sach a work as the wffrsh, from which
aire verses are cited, esfuslly existe, And till that work
Somes to Hight, no inquiry ean profitably be conducted to
ceable ws to form a conclusion directly on tho strength of this
Stavemoat ascribed to Rajadekhars, Beoaase, when Pandit
RV. Krishnamacharlar, the learned editor of tho Pi
dardikh in the Vani Vilas Sanskrit Series (Srirangam, 1906 )
challenged Mr, Shistrt to produce tho source of is informe
fion, the latior wrote. back in reply gat he borrowed the
quotation froma fried of Wis and “Thas the whole thing
pparently based on hearsey, came to almost nothing. And
thoratore it becomos necessary to suspen judgement on other
Gqestions arising ont of these quoted versot. Prof. Paranjpo,
fally conssions of tho wenknoss of Mr. Sbéstri’s position

1 Kitiatsa mentions Bhisa in the Protogue to his MAlastkAgn
saitra,

2 aamtqegattat sforesiveron 1 cwewrseedt feopafter tera tt A:
jatar. TUL. 128,

5 Inn article
for Deoomber 1915.

See p. xxvii, of the Sanakrit Bhtmaik of the Priyadars ik,
Yani Vilas Baition,

Marathi in the monthly Okitramays Jagat,



--- Page 23 (OCR) ---
cay

whioh was thas rendered quite untenable, passes over that point
‘and tries to urgue independently that Bhisa was tho real author
of the Nagiaanda, He has piokod up similar ideas! and gram-
matical and literary peouliarities,? from the published writ-
ings of Bhten end the two plays Nagdaanda and Priyadardika;
‘and relying on them he endeavours to show that the samo
hand must lieve produced all the plays. We must say with
referenoo to this attempt that the learned eritic has relied too
much on a gonerous imagination, aud ho is prejudiced as ho
starts with a declared purpose to be on the look-out for simi-
lar ideas, If wo aro to apply tho same argument, almost any
classical work in Sanskrit can be shown to be writton by
almost any famous poet, at there is bound to be some simi
larity, moro or Loss, evorywhoro, Similarity of idons is to a
certain extent common in all works having similar themes ;
vory froquently it arises out of tho fact that the works owe
their composition to a common souree, as in tho vase of the
Pafichatantra and the Hitopadeda; still more frequently

* itarises whon an author, who is acquainted with the works of

his predeocstors, deliberately imitates them or unconsciously
repeats the ideas and words with which he is familiar. Thus
‘the works of Kalidisa are abundantly bestrowed with phrases,
constructions, similes and ideas from Vélmiki’s Riméyapa,
But who will venture to assert that Kélidiss had a hand in
tho composition of the Bamayua, or vice eersa? In fact,
Prof, Paranjpe has stepped beyond the limits which a cautious
critic must always set to such an argument, There is not a
abred of ovidenco to @ony King Harshavardhana’s authorship
of the Naginanda, Granting that all these resemblances set
forth by Mr, Parsnjpe, and many more, do oveur, we canat
the best argue that Harhavardhana must have read and
admired tino plays of Bhiss. To jomp at any other conclusion
would bo unsafe and is most certeinly unwarranted, For in

1B. gy the worsbip of Agastys; the extreme heat of the
S‘arad somon the iden of wove (@ Maer wePa (NAg. p, 17)
sitallar to that of wowrglt (ale weet (Bhisa’s Pratijid-Yaugen-
bardyaga ) ; the affection of the heroines for trees and plants ; the
attempt vf saicide by hanging ; end somo others.

2 The tidst common of these i# the recurrence of the phrase

‘areerrey, which Prof. Paraujpe compares to wire sid at Nég. p. 118
(vatiant given ta the foot-notes to our ed, of the flay)”



--- Page 24 (OCR) ---
C24]

the iret plaoe there is the question of style, Bhést’s style it
Somperatively erude and bis language more esey-flowing ; ft
comPthave evidently bolonged to an catlier date than the
aed robwement of Harshe's works whore rfyleretmbles
Pott more Ghat of KAlidiva, Next it might be urged, though
rifeoke confirmation, that Harsha might hove written thene
plays on tho model of, and a8 rovised or modiGed versions of
ange of his predeceseor, Bhéss, in tho seine way in which
Sarak wrote hie MricheNhakofida on the basis of Dbésa’s
Chirwlatta, Bat for this we must wait till moro plays of
Shave come to light, including Ais originals of Nag.» Pry. and
Rate, if at all he rots these. But the most convincing
teatiwony, to our tind, to prove that King Harsbs of Kananj
vente the Négiuanda in the seventh century, iv efforded by the
Ghineso travellor-pilgrim I-Teing,? with which for the present
{ely conclude this briet inquiry into the genesis of ovr
Mage ie. writer—"Hing Slbltys® verided the story of
rie podhivattva Timstayshans who surrendered himself in
ice of 8 Nage, ‘This version was sat to usioy he had it
Vintormed by a band, aseompenied by daneing and aoting, and
thus popularized it in his time,

UL THE PLAY.
(1) Tux Srony ov sux Rarva'vatr,

‘Tho Ratnéealt or the Jewel Necklacs, is a drama in four
‘Acts; it fs so named after the Horoine, the Simbala prinocss
Ratebrali, whose unton with Kingg[daysua of Kankimbl
Togas tho thome of tho play, In order thet the student
they fally understand the varlous points subsequently to be
steguated, it in desirable that he should be acqasinted with
the outline of the plot, which is therefore given below :—

vfet, I. Alter the Benediction (Néudl), the SAtradbira in
the Drolade (Prasthvand) introdaoss to tho aadience the play to
be eneated, ei. Ratnioall by King Si Hatshedeva, After this
hegine the Act proper. King Vikramabituy of Siipbata hat «
decghter, named Ratnivall. A sage (Siddha) had prophesied that
hoover would marry her would be a paramount sovereign
Girvabhsama), Yaugendbarhyans, the obief minister of King

1 Boglish Tr. by Takakusn, p. 168.
2 This was one of the titles of King Harshavardhans,

RNIN Torrey


--- Page 25 (OCR) ---
C254

Vdayans, beard this rumour, end acting vpon it, sought Ratndvalt
fn marrige for bis master. King Udayans had already a wife, the
Queen Visavadatit, and for fear of offending. bor, the requust was,
disallowed by king Vikranabiliu. Thereupon Yavga. gota rumour
ciroulated tht Quoon Visavadatta perished in s Gro at Lavipakee
‘The osly objection to the proposed marriage b
Vikramablhu gave bis cument, and sent Ratat
board a abip. The
however, was lucklly rescued by trederot
clinging to # plauic. He recoynized her by the Jowel-Nectlice
(RetnemAlt, whence ber nawe Hstntvalt), which she always wore.
"The miolater Yaugendiardyans, to whom the rescued princces wes
brought by the tradery did not ancounce her identity, for obvious
roasons, but introduced ber into the Queen'supartments, where she
‘worked ss an attondant-mnid appropriately named Sdgarifal (‘excued
from the sea'). In a soliloquy oc the stage Yangavdbartyana
explaine all thete previous inctdents. The ehip whien carried
Rata, also carried Babbravys (Udayuns’s chamberlain) and Vasa-
bhi (Vikramabtbo’s minister)as theescortsofthe princess, They,
too, were rescued, but they were anaware of the similar rescue of
Ratolvalt, Hence, believing her to bave porished, they kept the
affair to themtelves, and atraightway joined the army of General
Ramaprat, whom Udeyans had orderedto lead an expedition against
the Kosala country. ‘Thus the only two persons who could huve dis-
slowed Sigarika’sidentity wereaway,and Yaugandhariyaps. thought
that abe (Sigariki) would be alle by means of her uncommun beauty
to win Udi rt under her agsumed name and position ax &
common maiden it would thes bebappierand betterto make known
hr identity as a prinoeas of the royal Blood. Those plans aled kre
briedy touched upon in Yaugaddhariyapa’s soliloquy. ‘Then enters
onthe stage Udayana, acqgmpunied bythe court-jestor (Viddsbaka),
‘Dhey divcnee and deecrite al Cupid's earatval whit Wag
then in full swing. Then enter. two maid-eervants, Midaifkh ddd
Chetalatilel, who dance and sing on the stage.’ ‘The Viddshile, X68;
feels inelined ‘to join them in a spirit of genctal gtiéty. © Attar
little diversion, the maids deliver = message ftom the “Queer'to thie
ing, requesting hie presonoe that day th the. Makaranda gurden,
The King and the Viddebake eoocpt’ the: favitation atid fortrwithe
ropaie.there, whero shortly arsives the Gusti decompanied ‘by her
Attendants, KisichanamAliy StgarikA (i ¢\'Ratntivalt ) and? othidias
‘The: Queen: perocives the -necdetity’ “of Keeping the extreniil
young aaa ectfel Shgurih ot ofthe igh ot et baaben ad
ends het away on some pretext: :Bat Sigarikt, who wae fol of
‘qusiouity 4b to how the Cupld’sfentival was oplobrated im this strange’
Inpd, hides, “behinds t7e6. snd Jooks on. tn the
‘the Queen offers, yworebip, to, Cupid, end. thea: tp cher hush
BLS

‘ocean ; the princensy
avdimbt whilesbe waa



--- Page 26 (OCR) ---
[20]

Stgerika, who had never seen the King before, feels for him lote-
atSratesight, and later, lourning thet he was tho eamo King
Ucayans to whom she had beon betrothed snd ront by her father
‘on bourd the ship, her love waxes strong, It being evening, the
festival closes with the departure of tho royel party off tho stage.

Act It.

In.en Interludo ( Praves‘ak«) two maidaervante annoance thet
the King was to go that day to visit the Meeamdlild ereeper with «
view to try upon it an experiment which woul wake it Moaon
ont of season, and that Sigariki had gove to @ bower of kadali
plants with painting materiale. Wo are then introduced to
SigarikA herself who is love sick and divertiog her longing by
Arawing the picture of hor lord and fooking wt it, In thie state so is
observed by Susamgats, her friend, to whom she bad entrusted the
cage of the queen's pot bird (a alritd ). A conversa ion eneues
botween them in which Sigerikt confesses her love for the King.
A diversion is created at this stage by the news that a monkey
had got loote and was frightening women and children. Shgarika
‘and the maid Susamgatd who was with her, butt leave the stage in
‘burry; the sdrild ies away from her cage which was broken
‘open. by the monkey. ‘Then enters the Viddshaks with tho news of
‘the success of the experiment on the ereepor Nucandlubd, which he
relates to the King. They thea come upon the bird (.drikd ) who,
parrotlike, repeats in their hearing the impansioued viterances of
Bigarike which abo had stoned to, as well as the replies of
Susangstd to them, There are no names mentioned, and tho King
and the Viddshaks discuss as to whom thota words could refer to,
‘They wander abort, and come upon ibe painting bastily left Lehind
by Sigariit, The Viddshaka therein recognizes the Kiog, bat neither
of thom oan recogoize Sigariké whom Suanipgatd bad pelated at
bile side and whom they had not seen Before. Tn the menus
Shgarik& and Sossmpgath come back for their bird and pain
Doard ; and finding there the King with the Vidishaka, they listen
to their conversation. It soon becomes clear to them that the King
too has fallen in love with the unknowa maiden (i.e, Sigariki) of
the picture ; Susamgatd thereupon introduces hor friend to tho King.
Apprehending a viuit frou the Queca, Sigarikd goes away, Then
‘entera Quoen Visavadatth who catches sight of the pslatiog-board,
‘epogoizen her maid therein by the side of her husband, gets
‘with the latter who gives evasive answers, and leaves in 0 lisié,

‘The orest-fullen King, thereapon, departs with tho Viddabska,
‘Act I,

In mi Intotlode ( Praves‘aka ) twé mald-rervante relate) bow
Souamgatd bas planned to bring about a mooting between the Kiog
‘and Siguribd who ia to be disguised as the Queon, Susamigatd taking



--- Page 27 (OCR) ---
[27]

the diguise of the Quoen's maid KifichanemAl. ‘Then enters the
King whom the VidQshaks aoquaints with this sebeme. ‘Thea they
Ith repair to the plice of rendezvous. In tho meanwhile tho
Queen, too, learns of the plot aad abe also arrives there. ‘The King
‘and tho Vidishiks take her for SigarihA (digguiaed ) and addreet
Lor ag such; the King porveives his mistake and tries to reconcile
her, but the Queen departs in high dudgeon, ‘Then there comes the
real Sigurik’ (dressed liko Visevadatth), but she procoeds to
a tha
it Le discovered by her royal mistress. ‘The King now
nkes her for Queen Visuvadatta, and whea he goes ~ rth to
rescue lier, he nee lis mistake and is very much rejoiced at Laving
been unexpretedly united with his beloved. But just ‘cn the
Queen, repenting of lier illstemper towards the King, comes beck
propared to be reconciled to him, to find him engaged in paying
lia attentions to Sigarik&, ‘The King feels now thoroughly abssied,
fund the ental drops on the acon ‘Viddehaka ia marched of,
Lound, along with Sigarila, by tite Queea who fullows both heraelé,

Act IV.

commit suicide by lunging herself in despair aa she suspé
Mot

‘Tho Queen circulates a report that SAgarikt was sent away to
her father at Ujjayiot, whileshe keeps her secretly a pelvoaer In
her pslaco so a¥ to prevent her being seen by anybody, Ta en
Interlude the maid Saraipgats gives to the Viddshaka the jewel-
necklico which was worn hy SigurikA and which the latter bad
IWanded ever to ler to be given tovome Brahinane as a gift, when she
herself despaired of hor own life. The Viddehake

master, informs him that SAgariki was sai
Ujjayiut and shows him the jewel-neck! 1
Wonzht about the ruccess of ihe expedition agaiast the Koala
county in which Ramageat had been engaged, Then entera a
mugigien whote peeforinance tho King witnesses ; bat this fs fnter-
rupted by tho arrival of fiablravya ard Vaauokti, who were with
the army cf Runuiyvat, and who had now returned’ to the capital,
YViaulliGti sees the jewel-necklace with tho Vid0wake and
recognizes it as the same that once belonged to the Princess
Ratudvalt. Ie vext proveeds to give a full acgoant of the proposed
marrige betwon Raindvalt and Udayana, but the narration ie
Snlerrusted by the coummotion caused by the news of a fire having

Drokeu ont in the royal bonweholl. Vasawadattd
Sigarikd (why wat a prisoner)

fn ber terror eho asks the King to eave her, The King promptly
rushes to the reacne, anid brings Sigariked sage out of the Bre. It

ig thon dlacovered tat tho tre was waroal, haviog, been the work of
that magician. Vaaubudti at ree gaiues his. princess in
Sigarikt, aod thea gyery ting is satisfactorily cleared ups... Vaya



--- Page 28 (OCR) ---
28)

stth regrets the treatment she gave to her rival, who tarns ont to
be her cousin; Yaugundhartyapa enters next to explain hie pert
in the affair; the magician had been sont in by him in order to
bring about the releae of Sigariki, Everyone ta happy, and
Queen consents to the Iongedeforred marriage of Udeyane and
Ratndvalt. The play then closes with the castomary Bharataedkya,
praying for pence, prosperity and contentment all round,

@). THE SOUROE OF THE PLOT,

It is « noticonble feature of dramatic literature in Sanskrit
that few, it any, play-writere have troubled themselves with
inventing entirely original plots for their plays, Most of thom,
among whom is our author, have beon content to borrow their
plots from ancient sources, either from the inexhaustible fond
of the grest Indian Epios, or trom the soml-legendary stories
current among the people. ‘The largort collection of these
logends, ever made, was probably the Brikatkathé, attributed to
one Guptghya, This work, which is eappored to date from the
first oontury A. D., was writton in the Paia'fchft language It
is, howover, unfortunstely no longer extant in the original ; but
wo havo two exoollent and fairly extensive abstraots of it in
Sanskrit both compiled in,the 11th century, the Brihatkethd-
maljart of Kebemendra and the Kathésaritesgara of
Bomadeva. The lattor (which is larger and loss condensed
than tho version of Kshomondra) is a veritable mine of
amoient Hinde legendary lore and makes as entertaining
reading as tho Arabian Nights’ Bntertainmente, ‘Tho original
‘of tho plots of Barshs’s three ple%e would be found in the
Kathdsaritesgara, Bat it is difflealt to pass any defiite
criticism on thoto originals and the changes worked in thom
by the poet, For, ths Katbésaritesgara is a later paraphr
which was not before Harsha, wlio probably had direct access
to the Brihatketbé itsolf: and we do not koow how far
improved upon the Brihatkathé in minor

Somadeva bi
‘details

In our edition of the Nigivanda we have given a long
extract to show bow closely the plot of that play was taken
trom tho Brhatketha, The plots of the two plays Priya.

TA term applied to w number of low Prakrit delete wpaken
by the most ignorant and deginded clagaes.”—Maodonell,



--- Page 29 (OCR) ---
(24

dariikéand Retnivali have alsobsen borrowed from the same
source ; but it should be stated that the borrowings here have
Rot been wholesale as in the cate of the Nagénanda. ‘The story
of the loves of king Udayana of Kaudémbf and his Queen
‘Visavaduttd seoms to have been exceedingly popular in ancient
India, as it is referred to by many posts of note, inclnding
Kilidésa—( who says in his Mogh.  meurewfigqaawaraivag.
rarer, weitwes feaghtat rercraise a® do.) acd Silraka dn
his Myiohobt. Amewcam geigenee gt). Tt is given at
Jength in the Kathisaritegara, As Harsba does not borrow
‘that story wo have not given any extracts from it here; the
curious student may consult the boginning of tho third
Lambaka for the sams, In the Kathas. is given an account of
how Yaugandbariyana, the minister of Gdayana, brought about
f marriage of his king with Padmfvatf, Harsha bas taken
this broad faot for his basis, and some names (euch as d}q>qzraur,
the Gonoral grova, garam, sree, Meret, erate &e,) are
common to his play and the original story, But the actual
development of the plot, as it rans through the four Acts to
‘tho dinowsment, is praotically his own invention, In the Kathis,
‘the princess is tho daughtor of king Pradyota of Magadha,
Padmévati by name, and it was prophesied by a seer that she
was destined to be the wite of Udayana ; but Harsha names her
Ratnévalf and makes her a daughter of King Vikramabéhu of
Ocylon. ‘Phe ramour of Vésavadatts being killed in the
Lévénaks fire is common to both the accounts, but the, ui
‘made of it by Harsha is not in the original and constitutes
novel feature, as alto dges the prophecy of the sage concerning
Retndvall,

In short, while originality of plob has to be denied to 0
post, it must be admitted that in the Ratnévall-his inventivs
goulus and consttuctivg ekill shine out ro proveminontly as ta
make his indebtedness to tho original quite insigaifiosnt. Thig
has endeared the Ratnivall to the Ister orities and students
of tho play, and Dimodaragupta, a poot of the cighth contury,

1 ‘The poot Bhiss, thirteen of whose dramas have been fecently
recover has written two plays ou the Udayana
story, the Seopnasdsavadetia end the: Pratifadyaupandiagaya.
‘hows follow the original as represented by the Kathla, much more
lovely toan-Ratndeait.. Harsh, therefore, dogs not, appear 89 be
‘indebted to Bhdap in thip reapest.. 5s ot 30%, RORY EE



--- Page 30 (OCR) ---
{80}

has in his Kuttantmata! given a detailed summary of the first
with the encomium—

sibewdtarst eunglatiad gang t
faguatised cio cenradiceag a ( 924)
“which udoubtoily it eserves,

@) TAE-ANALYSIS OF THE PLAY.

‘Tho action of ths RatnAvalf is rpread over a period of
four cousventive days (prabsbly moro), roughly secvrding
with the four Aste, The time when the act begius is the
avon of Spring ( of aren ercits® p. 3, weiter gar NEPA

10).

Act I—bogins late in the aftersoon of one of the dare
of the Madava-festival ; aud this must be the full~mcon-day2
of the month of Chaitra (gy quit agara: &o. 1. 15). For this
is clearly shown by the fact that the moon is described a:
tising just after the oun has set ( of. saaazircitalad 1
Esai fee Prurareq p. 27), The actual events narrated
Probably teke up two tours, when the sun ects and the Act
ends (a: art a8 e21 p26, dal afesang: p. 27).

Act II. Tao time of this Act cannot be conclusively
ascertained; but that it comer the next day immediately after
the events of Act I, is sufficiently clear. For in Act I,
Baguriké hands ovor the bird ehriba to Susimgats ( p. 22 );
the has forgotton to take it back, Susampgsta is shown at
the boginning ot Act If. as seeking her friend in order to
restore the bird to her korpiog (p.20). ‘This must be
evidently the next day. Tne tims, though not difuitely
mentioned anywhere, is probably early afternoon ; fur it was
(on that same day ( 9f¢ p. 20 ) that the, King le.mmt the @gR-
taragiyet from aftqzegre, and that must havo happened in
the morning, Aguia, Sagariké is mentioned as going to the

1 80e the of. of tho Kuffantimata ia Kivyamult, Gucheblaka
IML (1889) pp. 105110, Dimodaragngta not only mentions
oer, sowrarsr, the driet Re de but actually quotes the
‘Verse gyermrentriad fc. from the first Act of tho play.

2 And not the 13th, an aoppoued by Prot. Jackwoa ; a00 p- 91
of hie article in the Journal of he American Oriestal Sucialy; Vols
21,(1900 ), For the agmatege see p. 9 of our text,


--- Page 31 (OCR) ---
Ye

cat}

Plantain-bower, with a plcture-bosrd and painting materials,
this must have been in the afternoon, a8 then alone she could
have got leisure to doit, The eubseqvent even: follow con
frequently witkoat a bresk, and the Act erds seme time before
sunset, for otherwiss n desorption of sunset would most
likely bave come at tho end,

Act IIT —begins tate in the evening of the next dey,
Some! Lave imagined that the events of Acts If, and IT,
take place on tho tamo day, with only an interval of two or
three hours tetween. But this appears Lardly likely. For
the King is éovoribed as being love-sick and in ill-health (4
Bz sini earcear p 6 ), and the Quoen as sending Rabb
mAli to learn aboot the condition of his health ( segteardirea
wq: p. 2) Surely, at Joust m day's interval is necessary for
the King to manifest sigos of bis indieposition and the Queen
to get anxious on his seconrt. The action begius at about dutk

p. 61, qdafunag: p. 68 ), and is continued for a f
tho darkness (ngda gifed aeurgifatacde: p. 67)
sffording a ready gronad for the ecries of misteken identitiva
upon which #0 much of the interest of this Avt depends. Later
moon rite (foun: granim@urata: p. 74), the Act
1g lato in the night of probably the 2ud day of the
dark half of the ment,

ActIV. Tho evonts of this Ast follow tho very next
ay; the reference to €4gariké being s id to bave been
away at “mid-night” ( gafeunsiuk p. 86 ) obviously indio
tho mid-night intervening tetween the two ea
reepectively the events of Act JIL end IV, take place, As
to the actnal time of this Act, there is no conclusive proof,
bat it may be taken to be early afternoon, in the absence of
aay mention to the contrary.

(4) TECHNICAL REMARKS,

Tho Ratndeali in proveminently a Bx play which
esntorms strictly to the various emons of Sanskrit dramaturey,
and fs for this renton more often quoted In the later treatises
on dtaiiatorgy than many other play? Te bolongs to the slam

T Eig. Prof M. Windisch av quoted by Foot Juckamsap ok

2 In this sewpect it is to be compared with the Veyfeamh Arh
‘which also ia Very largely drawa upon’ in Sushkrittreniend 0a
Rouge ree



--- Page 32 (OCR) ---
cs)

of Upartpakas known as the NéfiAd and is divided into four
Acts. As rogard tho threo cbief requisites, tho weg or Plot
is wears or historical, as the story of Udasana and Vésave-
datts was popularly zeosived as Listory in the poet’s own days,
‘The Amt hore in giewfing, “firm, sportive and tendor-hoarted””
( Piitarat aicafen: sarew: get ag: D-R. IL. 3). The Heroine
belongs to the variety known as grqi, who is defined ss gray
areeaverar tar amr we: BMY (D.nR., IT 16). There is no aft
arag or gft-aifagr as in other plays, The prevailing tq or
jeutiment is srgre (Love). Thore is an occasional infusion of
‘som as in tho lament of Shgarik& ( p. 79) and of gig asin
‘the jokes of tho Vidéshaka, but thess are all subordinate to
‘ayre which permeates the whole. The sduefts, erafeears,
the Svo es and their various args, he

{in the commentary in the various plaoes.

As rogerda the dénowement sud tho extornal setting, the
play opens with the customary ayxft. Thon in the meqraat oF
Prelude the Sétradhire informs the andionco of the namo of
tho poet, the title of the play and the oocasion of its per~
formance, ‘Then thero is a fered in which the minister
Xe jarhyapa briefly relates that portion of tho story
which is anterior to the period where the play actually begins.
‘Then ouch of the throo succeeding Acts has a aitqg or inter
Inde, and finally thero is tho wraqrea as usual. ‘This is the
broad structural outline of the arrangement of tho play; for
details and minor divisions and tub-divisions of toplos
(e.g. erarain, wt, TH, Ge, Grew and others too numerous to
‘mention ) the stadent may consult the Daéartpake which
deals with those fully,

(6) THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE PLAY.

‘he roene of the play in Inid at Kaudimbt, the capital of
king Udaysna, who riled over the Vates country, Vatea is
thus deagribed in the Kathds.—siftr era a? @aret Qa aat-
creat teviey fatiiar wnt sfinar ey fiat m. The city of
Kaudimbt was very famous in ancient times, being mentioned
inthe Rémtyapa of Vélmthi. The Kathfs, doserlbes its
grandeur os wefifrarevafeinwety @fier (TL 1.5) In
many eylonose books it is named as ono of the ninetegh eApital

cities of ancient India, It was founded by Kuitaibs (on ot



--- Page 33 (OCR) ---
[ss]

Kas‘a ), tenth in desoent trom Puréravas, Time has deprived
At of its glory and now itis reprosented by the comparatively
insignificant village of Kosam, on tho river Jumn6, about
80 miles above Allahabad,

aiters—The country of Kotnls against which Rumagvat
Jed an expedition, is the southern Kosala, as it ia montioned
in the fourth Act that the Kosala-king had taken refuge in
the Vindhya fortress (freqgniqitqcey p. 98), ‘This is
distinct trom the Uttara-Kosula, where reigned the oslebrated
Kings of the solar dynasty (seo Ragh. IX. 1). It lay to the
south of the Ganges and stretoied as far as the modern Borat,
According to the Viyapurtina, Kuss, tho son of Rams, ruled
over this country at bis onpital gurewaft or guredt, built in the
dediles of tho Vindhya mountai

Firew—is identified by some with the modern Ooylon,
Others hold that it was an island difforent from Oeylon as the
‘two ate separately mentioned in the Bhig—P. Sk. V.,
oregdioet + rorradinnd we sacar | werner Ry
ard camer GaTeT: wexereg: faa st | Varthamthire
also mentions thee differently; se Brih.-Sam. Ob, XIV. 11,
15 ( wis aowtowaraideftear seat: | ).

wrerr—was the name of « villa
‘and was probably situated on the south ban!
eer its confluence with the Ganges.

Ajacent to Magadbe
of the Jnmné,

(© ORITIOAL AND GENERAL REMARKS.

‘Ot the throo plays of Sri Harshadeva, the Nighnanda,
which is a Nataka, is of unigss type and staads quite by
fteolf, boing intonded to teach a lofty moral; while the two
remaining ones (Ratntvalf and Priyadardika) may bo called
sistor plays, their subjeot being’ common,
Intrigae of King Udayana, Thay
‘and Vikramorvastya of Kstidd

4 Tho plot of tho Miley. ‘Feoinblon thet of our play i
etal ‘Thore also we find Milevikt,’ the Hetofse, ike AatoB,
Sheng Be scenario
aqueow Teva, © Thore also MAlavikk is pot ix’ fetters and coun
in rom Up thehietgusos Dhrigt nd is feared



--- Page 34 (OCR) ---
C8)

the post herein nelthor desires to touch any moral nor alms
at iNastrating avy of the great concerns of worldly life. Thus
these plays lie oa a lower plane than the Néghuanda; ncne
tho loss they aro sufficiently intoresting on the stege, The
Ritudivall,in particular, by tras of its well-eoncoived and
well-developed plot, bas attracted admirers over since the
Gays when it was first exhibited at Hareha’s royal thestre,
‘We have already quoted the enthusiastic praise accorded to it
by Damodaragayts; and wo might hero quote Dr. Muedonell,
who writes :! “Altogether, Zatnicall is an agreesblo play,
with welldrawn characters, and many poetical beauties.”
a play which hes thas elicited admiration from both oastern
and western scholars, holds no insignificant position in San
surit Hterature, and, as bus boon stated elaowhere, is very
frequently quoted (by way of illustration or authority ) by
writers on poet idence of s1yle shows that the Ratnéo.t7,
which Is more polished and distinctly moro graceful than the
ater production, wh:ly the NiyB anda
must bo put last, as it was obviously writtost during the
closing years of Harsha’s Ii

‘Tho Ratodvalt is deservedly the best of the works of
Harsha; it observes the nities of time and place, and maintains
the spectators? interest in the story right up to the end, where
Gaally the ingenious little plot of tho minister, Yaugaudbaré-
yapn, in rovesled to the King. How cleverly the port hus
manipulated the incidents for keeping up the interest may vo
observed in each Act. Thus he ingeniously makes uso of the
talking-bird, Siriks, both for ths parposo cf frightening the
‘Viddsbaka aud allowing the audience to enjoy s joke at Lis
exporse (ats@ we: WanUth p. 49) and of informing tho
King of the beginnings of bis own love.sf.ir. Next in
‘Act IIL, tho poet lus, by drorsing Sicarith as Véswwn:

1 A Mistry of Sambrit Literatere, p.382. Cf. leo
story iv romani, the fudents are weli contrived, the aftuations nro
cniineatly drannti, and althonyts tho spectator is let into the woeret
of theplot fromthe beginning, the iaterest {4 very auecessfully
rnaiptained, The inF'gue evrrospoods perfectly

given by Scllege;it is the union of uo-exyccted combinations,
Teaulting fcom the caatesding operdiva uf vesidental oceurronces
and premeditated desigos."—{ Wilvon ).

2 Sco p, XLVI, of our ed. of tt play, ‘

Th



--- Page 35 (OCR) ---
[353

and Sosamgaté as Kifichanamf'S, Gnoly used tho opportunity
thos provided for resting number of mistaken identition
which not only belp the plot but mast aleo have been very
amusing to the spectators, The fire-cone in the lart Act is
again an exoollont display of ingonsity, without whiob tho
oatrazes of Sigariké on the stage at the required time would
not have been possible, exoeptin some bare, Lumdrum, manner.
‘Tha Yeugndherkyaga should havo plansed and workd
out the whols marrisge-icteme on bis own reeponsibility,
without letting the King know anything atout it, seeme
0, The minister himself fools it when he sass egret

afin quits aq: (p.9). But by the above device the poet bi
given such a Gnish to the whole thing as to mks it impossible
for the King to blame his minister, or the Quzen to witho'd
her eoasent to tho intended match. ‘The only draw-back in
‘tho play is thit the post as represented thy Heroine as somc=
what simple-minded. For, ia his anxiety to describe tho
supreme bandsomeness of his Hero, he makes Sagurik& co:
ceive him at Cupid in bodily form (p, 25) and then suddenly
recogsize bim as a human personage, Another week point is
‘the hangingetoone in the third Act; the post seems to bs
rather fond of painting bie [oroines as unable to hold out
fevon for ashort time and secking relict

oxtreme and exnggerated fathion; for he
nd a similar dovico in the second Act of the Nagknands

At any rate, it does not speak much for the Heroine
strength of mind,

‘Tho RatnAvalf isa court-comedy and nota sosial comedy
like the Mriohobhakatiks; hence it is natural if it does not
give us mach detailed information about the tooial customs-ot
the domestic habite of thé people iu thote @aye, Tt appeare
that music (p. 15), datcing (p. 14) and painting (p. 30)
wore the fias arts ciltivated by: cultured ladies ‘theme
with the proseat day Hindu eooiety: Shipping ia

8 commorsial enterprite (p. 8). Magio toeme

to bavehad afiem hold on the popular mind (ef. siferedt f&
airaedeiat rare: p. 89, and also the Qeraitewascoue: i
the fourth /Act), Beliet in ghosts’ was then as oomiuoa at
it is now (ef, how the Vid@stiskw ts frightened: at!
Beyond those stray facts we got fow glimpses into the

lite of the people of Hazsha’s times, i



--- Page 36 (OCR) ---
£36)

imple and essy-fiowing, though
consciously elaborate in a few places, It has not the grace
or rhythm of Kalidésa, bat it is also remarkably froe from
thoartificisl ponderonenoss of latter-day Sanskrit. S'ri Harsha
evidently took Kélidéaa for bis model and many of his stanzas
fandsentenoosare rominisoont of Kalidasa, Thus aresisferreat-
fact afaeat &o. (p. 9) reminds us of ganfanfaird aarntere-
erat went &2, (Qfblay. IV. 5), Compare also a waaist
afar rorgearaartires’ (p. 92) with srregiegrer ga wt eT
qasat Go, (SAR. IL), gagrongeistt (Pp. $5) with geet
Fear (Méiay, IL. 4) and many other passages pointed out
in one Notes. Verses like aqaazrafcatat &e. (p 27) and
feu: qantion Gratrareaeativa: Se, (p. 58) are not unworthy
eMyte distingolahed author of the Gikuntala, Tt has to bo
tdmitted, howover, that ooming attor Kélidéts, Harsha hes
fot quite eccaped from the deterioration in style that is obser
Vable in post-Kiélidisian authors, Pans like thoso in
Garagraar Bead TaTTAATTE a: Go. (p. 45) or EmgrETER-
Saye &o, (p. 27), long compounds like deargerehreecerat-
mreregarearg(P- 66) oF wrettainrgararaqaragtrarcencatis
fare. (p- 103), and jingling collocation» of words like thote in
Serorecfreetumrnerhrestremiiy (p- 94) aro of vory rare
eourrense in Kélidéa

‘The style of Harsha is

In simplicity and ossy intelligibility of style, Harsbs
would rank next to Kalidasa, ondabove Bhavabhitl, But
the same cannot bo said of him as a dramatic artist, or ax
master of language oither. As the author of the three plays
taken together, Harsha’s. position among Sanskrit writers
isin the second class, He oalls himself, in modesty, only
faqu GR (p- 5} but Jayadeva (the author of the
PrasannarAghava) calls him ‘tho Delight of the Muse of

No that in his

conferring upon our
‘would damur, We on our part aro content to ondorse the
poot’s own estimito of his work, that he was a“ skilfol ””
(Prgu) weiter, 4 star of lesser brilliancy then Kalidasa or
Bhavabheti, but certainly not inferior to Bhatts-Néryaps
or Vidékhadatts in constructive art.

‘ees



--- Page 37 (OCR) ---
[37]

() THE PRINCIPAL OHARAOTERS
IN THE PLAY,
‘Vazeana’ss (Huo),
bo romarked at the outsot that the interost in the
story of this play depexds on the incidents, and not so much
on the dovolopmont of any particular character; this is also
‘duo to the fact that the action of the play is spread over the
very short period of a fow days, and not over a number of
months or yours, in which latter onso there is sufictent soope for
developing a character more fully. As it is, we shall oontent
ourselves with pointing out the salient characteristice of the
dramatis porsonw as delineated by the poet. ‘They are all
cast in the conventional moald. ‘The Hero is King Udayana
of the Vatsa country, chosen for the purpose of showing him
in the enjoyment of courtly life, the charming incidents of
his public Tite (ai grt = TeaTsTaR p. 5) having already
won for him great popularity. Ho was a good rulor who
understood and discharged his duties and responsibilities (of,
usd fiteeg Siereiae ae eRe aR meTEaTeTETfeAT Na,
fentaeant: we: 1.9). We get few glimpses into his
Political caroor, as this is not a political play ; still, ono stray
Temark that falls from him in eppreciation of a vanquished
too (org Breer arg! age Bo asredt eT TUNIS guest
aviafa | p. 94) shows his generous and noble nature; while
his surprise at Yaigandharéyapa’s action (wamdh nrafter
Grewia p, 108) shows that the minintor had to eomraie
him in all state-mattors before they wore finally disposed of
‘We need not look askance at his love-intrigue; polygamy
yas common in India among sovereigns in thote days, and
it is oxougable if the King felt attracted by a now. taco, He
himsolf.wae vory handsome, a8 is shown by his being mistaken
by S6gatiké for Oppid (p. 25). ‘That thie was not his frat
Jovepafiair is clearly shown when he natrates his covert
sxporlencos in verses, like agringieet &o. (p. 38) and
Rgafinat sf se &o. (p. 70). Although forced to toll
siilla, when the occasion demanded it, as whon he deoied
having, ayer agen Stgariké. (4g gEuNt p- 57), he does it
saniygeally,and doos.not toll s downright lie. Being a gaat
master in danling, with the jelousies. and. counter-jeslogsias
‘tn big harem he is earafal not to wound, tho foolings of sla
Old love, ati shown by hiv uniform respect for his agen
Rid



--- Page 38 (OCR) ---
($8)

‘Visavadatts and his constant endeavours to concilinte her.
Gallant spoochos like mafas aearereaetes cota, and my
weermenreacaraimaiiia (p. 17) ‘8 further testimony to
his courtesy towards the Queen. He is a kind muster, as is
clear from the familiar ‘manuor in which Susamgoté apetks to
him at p. 51,

‘Tas Vinv'sram.

‘The Vidishaka is a necossary, oonvontional character in
most Sanskrit plays. He is » Brahmans, the privileged
court-wit and a constant companion of the Hero. Bis apparel,
stupidity, and gonerel air of solf-conoait sorve to exaite
laughter on tho stago; he is generally described as ugly
in appearanes (of: how ho is mistaken for a monkey; p. 87.
His business is als int in forwarding the progress of
lovo-sftairs of his friond the heros this ho accomplishes in this
play to a groat extent, and tho rendezvous in Act III. is
brought about by his agenoy. Ho is made to dance and sing
with the two maid-servants (p, 16) to show him up ass
simpleton, His character as a glutton is shown by his
constant roforences to sigs (pp. 16,86). As a Brobmaps
hho is fond of boasting of his Knowledge of the Vodas; what
‘that consists of is known when he mistakes a arar for 8
(p. 42). His tasto for study is tom in his romark af
‘weal agate (p. 16). Ho is somewhat greedy and is over
ready to receive gifts and presents (pp. 11, 45). His wits
fare not really dull, however; they oan become quite sharp
if the ooonsion requires it (6. 9. gqeq AY Aya LETTER |
aqgraeg Gv Four: iforaeT | p. 20). His emotions aro easily
exsited ; ho is oasily trightonod (¢. 9. gafererperara’ ts St:
afrrete p. 405 i seareas | Aaa ee ® Gzae p. 98) and as easily
‘and readily delighted (2, g. at p. 56 when he dances in wild
joy and lots fall tho picture-board ). Generally considered, he
‘constitutes the chief source of tho comic element on the stage.
Revorthelow, now and then we got a glimpse of the nobility
of his mind. For although the ramamdié was given to him
asa prosent (p. 86) he hands it over to the King for bis
diversion without raying a word about it (p. 91 ), and fiually
rostoros it to Ratnivalf (according to one reading; #00 p. 109).
Again, bis love for his master is unbounded—to him noneis |
fs great—as is clear trom his words sq 91 GSU: GHOATT:
eater FAG (ps 48), and A rE EN get un OHTEOT aOR
swerae: fo ( Ps 48.



--- Page 39 (OCR) ---
[39]
Sawveanrms’,

Although the play is named Ratngvall after the Heroine,
yot, for reasons alroady stated in the case of the Horo, thero
is nothing ospecially noteworthy about her character. She is
Aesoribed as a young and an uncommonly beantifal princess,
charming and accomplished—one who captivates the Hero's
mind at the more sight of her picture. Hor character is
not drawn with a view to represent her in the glory ofa
maiden of high birth like MAlatl, or to paint her in the
grandeur of marriod life either. ‘The obief noticeable thing
about her is her great love for the King, with whom sbe falls
in love-at-tirst-sight, thinking him as handeome as Cupid
(p.25), Her snother trait is her extreme sensitivensss of
feeling, and the slightest untoward incident plunges her
into » depth of dorpondeney 40 that ho immediately thinks
of death and suicide, Compare afar avai am aequrfirar
saftang p. 31, aiftanrraiiedt af p. 47, and aefagiet ewa-
Rerarggederar a gaatawagercar tear afteat p. 79, gt
waarar siftaritieat sar do. p. 85. This representation of
weakness detracts not a little from her character as s Heroine-
‘Tho only relieving feature of her charactor indireotly indicated
is her high sense of family honour which provents her from
disclosing her identity even to her friend Susamgata.
Va'savanarma’,

Sho is the chief Queon, elderly and staid; her love for
her lord is deep-rooted, and is recognized as such by the
latter whon he remarks far geeaw egeneeat Simmel TERT
Ren: earRanftent fe waft (p. 77). Sho is well awaro of
‘tho King’s fondness for a protty toe, and hence tric
(p, 21) hor best to keop Sigarikt out of his sight,
Failing there, sho is naturally joslous, and as such interrupts
‘the King in his love-passages ; but she is really affectionat
‘st heart and her angor is of short deration, ‘This is amply
‘lustrated by hor almost instantaneous ropsntance at haying
spumed the King’s reconciliation (p. 81). Her tenderness
of hoart is shown when she readily coufesses hor seoret, ei
tho imprisonment of Bigariké in fottors, tho moment sho
perceived her to be in danger of life. Her magnanimity ig
shown finally, when she willingly sccopte Sigerika a4 Ber
rival and sharer in hor loré’s affeotion, her charae
appearing in generous and lovable light, eae



--- Page 40 (No text found) ---

--- Page 41 (OCR) ---
cary
IMPORTANT ABBREVIATIONS.

| Megh —Moghadétat
| rich —Mrichobbakatika®

Ms.
Satokas, | Made
MW

fannemriti,
Mudrérékehssa,*

Bhaffi.—Bhattikavys. (-V.).*

Brih-S.—Bribateamhité. Naishadhfyacharita,
-Up.—-Bribadaranyako- | Pén.—Phnini’s Asutidhyayt.
panishad. Priy.—Priyadardika (N, Bd).

Cf-—Comparo, | Pt,—Pafichatantra.*
Chapter. | Ragh.—Roghavaméa.*

—Commentary; commen. | Rém.—Réméyana,
Ratn,—Ratnavall.#
Rig -V.—Rig-Veda,

D.~K.—Daiakuméracharite.t
D-R.—Daia-Rapata,

5,—Site
/$4k,Sakuntala of Kélidésa.®
Séhityadarpan:

Grammer (by the Editor),
Hid—Bhdecabast.* | SubAd,—Subbshita,
Kothis—Kathiansitabgara. | 6 0. yay svapnee
Kéo., K-D.—Kévyhdoris, ‘dutta of Bie
-Kirdtérjuniys (1. | S'v-Up.—Svetasvataro-
Kary oprakkia, panishad,
—Kumirasambhste.* —(Y4ar,—Uetararhmacharite,®
Vart,—Véritike,
Vepi.—Venieambra,*
j—Mallinatha, Vikr.—Vikramorvastyac®
+ Mat-Médh—Milati- Vikr.~Ch —Vikramtithads ye
Méabe charita of Bilhapa,

— Siéuphlavadha,

=

Annotated by the Editor. eae



--- Page 42 (OCR) ---
[42]
DRAMATIS PERSONA,

MALES. |
sqware:-—The stago-manager. |
erat (aqua: )—Tho Horo, king of Kouéémbt,

Pagar: (waeae: A Brébmans, the Hero’s companion and

court-wit,

atreaerat:—The chief minister.

Aeeraqal—Tho nophow of Rumapvat who is tho commandor-
inchief of tho King,

arava:—The chamberlain of the King.

aqaftt:—Tko minister of Vikramabthu, the king of Simbals.

Rerenfire:—A magician.

FEMALES. '

ét—The stage-mansger’s wife,
‘cerraett (mown as grater) —The Heroine, daughter of king
Vikramabihu of Simhals.

areeqar—Tho Quoon, wife of King Udayan

sqrartarat—An attendent-maid of the Qaeen,
‘geirrar—A maid-rervant, friond of the Heroine,

‘qrefrar—A maid-servant.

nqfivet-—A maid-torvant,

Praforagt—A mald-sorvant.

‘Tea (atfigré)—The door-keeper,
OTHER PERSONS &c. MENTIONED.

frreeraTg:—The king of Simhs and father of the Heroine,
‘eyearq—The commander-in-ohiet of the King.
Brant ( area )—A talking bird.

SCENE. %
‘Kandémbi, the capital city of king Udsyans.



--- Page 43 (OCR) ---
atret |
reraiteeaee Bight AAT
‘are oe: Bhigeae arise Pare: |
eat att cere: crag aro:
at Fer gaa eftareritet Ager

rare

RW eetussscatitstrma a foemecte
Revere: sfrerenfer: seer: SRT ESTAOTENCT: CHT

Reoltereendeoretewt eer ft ere en euated ain 5 8

eis ort Pare: 1 ares Breer eer vera bearer: Ie

SUR 6 Rasteernamramen et Pratt Raftiemcerga
PANE ate Et FETA |

ert: ety wenferertermgitemigient: ety
Yetta tRaieaae Gearder at THA MRR



--- Page 44 (OCR) ---
C44]

seqrtamra—" aaa: werner eed | Aa
Of: wfengets dhrrenesfery wera WAAL Rare BART.
aiteoutiieieencmes seat ata: agua 1 ot
RGIS TTT: ge at fared A
apnvareaeaiterer geet dared ft deat serra |

Tier REREEAS eeaTaeeae Tet
aah ages geida tenteae: — “ enfisnifaed
semaniiid ar | fgaaieced cafe Caractere”
ater agian aeanse eduerdt avmaed =H
PR, | CTO, aT we: TT BATA
TT IEEE | se TaTafeteh
FRMATES aT ae AAU: | SAAN:
Grerrteteh geonky aiaategard aaa sea a
sire: | ann 1 ReBaenraetaaro Tare TET eT
aenitaRart, STE: aT AMT | EIST saa: UATE TATA |
Stren wet 1 oat a agai sey
fark crtagte. gemtrerrtaRet—

Tame sagt arte | oe mete qaeTdiaia
after sen: adentraardrgets: | eat Resae seers
ararerer Streeter Preerazeet T GegeeT Te: Fa Ate!
aaa wat ad meth Sah ReaieE eee ear
SRRe ree a ah mea a at oat afte
Aneseraret afbaingarer enieist agare snfleitsh Remnag:
semrftvirarat Roar arereerenfirerat ferme Tort ASR
ape sentir afar ataaeeT aA ARETE TMT: fe
araPad srast wegitit gat coral subg Berane | ses te
att Rate eae aes ae a aera aA a
sagiftean 1% g Racerenwearare Hee aah at Ben rere
Ba aftron eer: cerrreger eoatat Teel aT aRBETAl FT
seafiaer dere meer aterrerampet erie | tsa era
amet eta afte at arechfearar ofteremnAt Bat eTeReTT
Barer eaten, | Gime ae Rae. HER eae eer
sae, RLS. Wert See: aR 1 oe



--- Page 45 (OCR) ---
~

|
{
|

[454
orcad: are ETASHL Te ra Ate TAHA TER.

AAR ater etait agar ares ToT a TeeR aTAgTET
resi eetarar atrafaar | atementat aigerritereranat atet
og er creas wert cele aA oftar HAA Ge a at
vier Stet 1 ante go aorEEENT Ae
Teomtsiead, | eM ey 4 AREA TAT |

Co amie wetrameraterguen seed aPeaaRTe |
erent atte airhaion 1 amienssieret week cat
aren airenshe raat araeernaamet 1 aa ge area
at den aiemarere | gacen tare am aiiter fer
FRONT eT TT | wa ASH ara wy
var: saeRtie termed agatt ert 1 ater a a
wiaRawwfaseane | Tar aaeretews! feet: 1 ee aly
geen after af sear arate sagen arte aig:
ae oF aagel att: sae serene | sia sat erage’ aah
anita aueret Ret Rereeh wordt 1 ae: giv Gea
crema came Tar Ae: sere cer arate et
ater 1 eee arama Gram giererare | sire
a mean Rene fet ga: Soya: fe a a
SECA FI |

serene eet Sere: Sata Se SA Sea | ATT at
aritet Satara aaiseeramt: set afierarr atten
AAR 1 oa Ta ae aecaret ett tee
Jertan wre eT yet Ae anton aATeT
aaa ae ah: cant aoePeHe 1 GE aay aetay-
Ta as: Fa AAT oMigetert aretearwesga-
wag ea toRaar earache Mt Tea | ae ATE
gente GR aries TART TT aMoREPTaterTeraRtagT-
sea omer Steere ele: Mera atest
ad: ore aerat + cet TERT oe Se



--- Page 46 (OCR) ---
[46]

Rie am) gtr oraiset aa eA aquest RraPrIEET
a merge rT STEYR evar Pew a a
aera eT eres fos exec, RAT, sree! Rat
paneer carematg ae weaned | ster Rot egret aagaT
aa carats Rave ag aeraat ag ete ger FTA
aqaig see aia “amit stoweectsttt tae a
vat gaeeasHe garcter am ea Sts Gee Trea
eer a iahterT srimraTT A aftarea atrar
sam ee ater 1 ae aL” eh Aaa ae etort gare |
feast at ata oe ainguaed 1 amitenrs ahah
rt aera water wet aaee | cat Rewige ca
seattle erecta eee Barer ror Frat: Serer: a
afi eeaattrrenigorrtia srt eRe Ta | TART
msteganteat arenas aA Barer gee TAT HET
at SA Basar Ua Ree TEM: aioe THT
we Ta aya: 1 oat Pree TEM Teasers: “wer aH Be
aeah Barret Where: ” ht ver Rrra TTT
seitrrontenanradsieirs et artes: det
att araveen aor Piensa Creda denis aafter
feat 1 netamaierniga: af cageadt 1 ask ale
ster anita ator | ae ah ser af 1 aa: Fee
frre a TART i aitesten a amit agate eT
sat seaftanar 1 ferramramrer amet Mgngeed aot a
ftgenrd erred | aah at erater be eve aCe THAT
aa aaa Store eA ale Shea + gar
« gefani carer: ” oft a erdarare | ot at att Bae
deergrest ahet weet eeUTARRTE RTE |


--- Page 47 (No text found) ---

--- Page 48 (No text found) ---

--- Page 49 (OCR) ---
4
i

aaetotetatne

Taraat |

eee

meRitsE: |

waaftacat de errors axat
aedh aegeeteaaared aie dara 1

Sisrear Reefer: SISTA
RPacaeganrafeiiierar risa Reise oT a UE

imine Rrerea a |
aera SAAT TE

om aaa, seat ea: seat auentdaeaa a
aravat Teal‘ aray faeAsaer ages sare’ gegaeT AEG
mio cerererea shaped faieer cash TERE wigieRTA-
“rama wart aa wet RAT TREN shee
aferen erm Reman | eermeyereRaee eral aaa" ore
aaghith at rgad ae sragiddaied adage
fftsrar srdear mea Aer ARR Ra: | aaRhale Hf a Rg
Ape: ae ae Sra: He PSone Ret: Tea EAI a: ATA
orale | rg garam: | Veet RoE Me: Aaa
veers | Gigs oft orgie areata | emia age ea: ae: ee
RIRAG 1 HOT RURAL, BRL TY! BA gs Ge GA: TROT
aneieat satan | gaat amit | gear gaat afd Gey a cre
oR er wa: oI ERE TITAS’ ef ere: aA |
é aren wearer | wee AAR WAN ser gee eet | geet
Qa Star saledia: seen Aeg: 8 afar a egee
adateren ota aasaniaa aaa ae: i aa ee
Seer smemien: 1 sa eentenRgiaeraat qr eRet
qqerenrea trader: | elrada seatergaeeehs azn
carketanitec gem amare g ‘qubiR wa: est tearm: wtaoaTeat |?
WR aetBreenteen ae ge | ogame wes

2g. ar. & TT,



--- Page 50 (OCR) ---
& aerreat

aft a1

ategata para sega earedarat feat

aerdegagarel Taare gt |
SB TAT TSTTTTAT aie aa Se
etree eto eee Raat ferarates a0 FU

ait a1

aad | fe ge ) agartint aa ott foering [ Hee] aT!
artarerrerarepfeat & oereveTE
__ eter a eater weet TTT TN
aot oan: 17 0 9 aaa Pra gerarat TAA
aft G1 otter 1 Ae det Merererat sre ST
gen ara seg Ba gat war wer HAL aa GT TTT | HE
aed seg: OI GET FR ST TARGA wuaciatan | aegagst
cee wage AG: a: AR Sea | aval RAR
aatgest dian qe Sige sar | aa: gece a aE ee Te:
reqges aaea FAL a STITATEAUCAT | ag ene APA a Ca
set grea aa areata eageat aera gaat Tare
gets ar ater | anitat eg gaat Ger Peat santa TY a
rarer ears eg TE: | a ACTA aaraeareiarerna tts
zane: | age create (RE: eaierrewestey,” 1 Is
Fahd gem | WATT RU Ora GE ARRAAT se emTeTTa-

imate RisterrrenaTTh: ereneratien Reaten eaTTETTG

ae fre Ruat met cel ToeheerTaTTTEe Fores Aes St
ewer Pree HATE OTA TET RECON: ETT
ree at sepcharara | re ad met agelen treme F Feat
He Ae SH TNA OTETETeTe ARIAT I | AR
fe oat GR: AMA i Aeon mH at Ae ge oS
gree ten THAR LT ge eevk | ena wee Beat
gat ade | ne THaT sare TePereT | mg RETTTRE
serene 1 aa TNL aT ae | a Ae eater aT aT
wat See TARAS | SHAT foe 1 BSemat Feut gfe
ohonat ecereat oR BOT GT Ee ereee arco aT
carter HSE | RAT CRAMER TONAL | ATE AMT TOMO.
fa se | aoe nH MeL me | sae cxat acre

Peaardes | ah ep a BI



--- Page 51 (OCR) ---
at a)

i fag airf
aaftenrtneret emma ay 8 rate 81
at a)
Rrrggriten aa: ete Ragqea freer weg |
weg a geht aaReTT Nery SeraG eT ATA U8
AG A pee | a 1am at cara MeitataT-
ast rea a wert 1 Ppl ous avatar
pfeat wet Srmmenitet oR wae etme sTEATRIE-
Rea a pang arr wre 1 ese mt met mee tei
ah ae ong & Bom: Ga Res | ee oe |
BVBARer | aeaatid weer caeuaawer wad feta: ser
AAR: Fart atts MOR amen: 1 BN ark 1 aT aA
FR aR dara g aeTATRT aA wea oT: ae
aa tae ene: | ger emiedermnicaa ae: |
rege Hf 93 oe a eA Teenie a og a aoe
sweater aaa Det eR aA ere, esa SITE |
fas wea: gat eBiat va: aes op stan: aarshE aferen-
vareriven: aga: saat: Rafa: aaa ata deained-
cea one: ger: Dea get
famed aa: veer
eee rea eH Ge: | ee:
wea wet Rrra ae Rea ee 1 RAN Ags Goya wa:
eS rh ees 1 arava: set rer: ae 1B ATR
dares ora gu Be Reet eBeiahre: MasMTAM sae
teat ced fastener woraeiten 1 Ate HIT eg
FORT: | OATGAI: EPAGT | BIT GUL atalat er BeaPeagar
ware. sida! eA cage wn gee awe eT
‘fererferfe egat earring) | aeergg-at fear? eT ae
swore Fd wets rer, Bd HA HSH eae eA rRNA RAL
anes, eek, Sri, < age, | A. yee, MST

BERT, TRB, OR, «ee, aM, smart 98
aug gee 4, Be, ewe, a EM, Gee



--- Page 52 (OCR) ---
conn oder aft aang | tet: emt
a aqagaatagse: | Reeargsarean: | GPs artes: w GIA |
© gad Sarena: SITET? aR ata: 1 te seat Bal a
reagan: Greet WG | aA aE Ags et Aru | GRE
eavereemegreaa rent GT wT mag Roa: wR ET ATT
meaner: | amar: THe: RAG: TRE A AGHET SAT GT SAAT |
seafarers eng een sors setae GTI gH! “TT
agit ert gi 3 ast see gheia’ 48 eT HY UE
Sree mere Sear) aA aed seat Ar HET
cefoafieqecaat eet serie serge: aa: | aFRek—
Aatorasta eraiter geval apt araRasd 3 aA TH
@aasaed area gata aaeeT Sera: arava: TEA:
qa ae Ba a ret aay: aRaeT gene CUAAATETAL eR aay
eae: es ga: | Sepia wereteonear eet HET He TET
géraront: efdieon aera ee gitar areaicre: Bea:
afta: 1 gh wemrearsacdite avait eg wed TeeTG...
aber atterada a ert TAA ag als a7 RA et
sears Pec: 1 Hea ce dea eae erator | ea
aor —( rare )— aera ae 1 ( arate ae |) gentort:
ate: | od RAAT ora: GAIT | IAAS-RAAKTRA
mace: 1 ae: Sides oT EH Trae, | Seer ell
sat Raadieta—amite—er are TRRarmsaeT AR ee
aii Renieaae— ernie: | eT STUATAT AET gata arene
guitar a sguigattarte: Qanfease tiniest: | corm
Renard aA 1 Paget wi areata at
wa Ratrata aguigiéa wad aa: om a eaten:
afte: arereat 8 1 ardioegeteriantt— wee wea
eatonast: geen: tat Gea | TATE amare ETH
ca eT P| TTR ——oret aT: Nt
grandee: 1 aria oad cert caeePeaish a | auedtalen-
Areertraierdear 0? A | aeeTRH Ae Brea: ae HE
Rearend Rsmeaaratoeret vee aR or ToT: TATA
ak meaoet emer Re 1 Es GATT | AEE aN



--- Page 53 (OCR) ---
seise: | q

QAI VHRR | sng aeeaAY aagTA-
ama ATIRRaA Ta: steitser gravatar
WA a-—herceahiar seeagageTe Ta
wast am Re sar | at STRATA: AAA FA 7 J
saint er | aneaa tig: areTTETERA aATTTETY
ape waco aa aeeae | aeatearh
Saeaerat gear aeaitel td are | (cfesta eeaere = 1)
a4 arate aeons Aas BF Rata: | aa: |

atteaf fag: a: ofteqeyer gmenftett

ati ett @ aerate ets gat ea!
awddentic aaanesit fe aA
_ Sarita waft sat gone aa: uu
“qat ah Bt eaatren aega: 1BT ar TTARAT aeT TA
SR aw aR agai wahmemtzamnfea 1 ETT ee |
ach wahargard reais gaa: lagtadiaean et aaa a TS |
wait aoe UTE: Se 1 a1 EAA | Read SAE
amotio Fa PARTE are 1 a eg ek 1 os ape
valiarasaraeR * gaat 1 aude aa: create
anesy cmvfeddt a8& 1 ater fa: Bet & araniea: 1a a8 Rare
Ser omit tad o8 as oredr sete aesiea 1 eT
era Pa | ate aE ae at anh sgt at wey aN eT
caer oat afanat Geer gat 1 za SEAR aa. eR:
aeamesate: Be 1 areReeat wae 1 Reacaat eh seat
ara: TH ger Gaat SEATTAAL | ee Ta LT OG TNR,
eam: 1 or gf Sat) sora ont stare a lt Bae
suafiat age | aaaeaast 6. Goa: | SET |
ont orate Su eaUReA ae | Ree
Fags: sr vote reroveat_ some eft WR! BAT. aeRUT A |
PUR TB | are AA: | ray ea GAR, RATER
ReUT Sua: | AS aTerTRENGEA t et Rea: ge bile

2 aRRRa, ¢ SenarTa, Ferre, | Tere BATS EN
Ay can sgdeet wtaee. aT, oT MT 4 TeaTe, © ARRAS)
Aare, < AT 1 tee AT MRT, eA,
$ sfteqase; stat Rates, ¢0 aa, MORRIE



--- Page 54 (OCR) ---
& aaa

aaag ae rear BROT easiest
deatagertss + | ) gamed geq | aacseant |
(3881) af EAT

( sie)
aah—arigt gaa | atgroeeard: 3 Paisg-
saan | ( % )
ara al earseheattgAisd Tei | eq qeat
Wee |
agi-—( Perera) ands Ara eartalh
aevenre Fea (ae GaAecTIAT CAA BRT | aft eat
aaftaee Reuse aa | wet GRA wat RTT: TM
aes afrerdiearar Recents 3 a afaarle | Fg
afeaere | (a)
Com) Semrae eenleg 1 ain rat i Pres sraPeseTRTe t
Ce) sara Mitte att RF aT bt oy orate Vag Sot Bea
aor, ar ea wba | aH Ge ELA RUA Rott ee gH aR
air eq Borer ier Te, Frere, oe or FRR |
% ga oe!
SR Geet wg aitad anid aed emibeneaatrel Ter
spielen 9 ema 1 get AM AEE AAT TY saaa: aA
art Leahta: dys Mite: ot gmmagerenst te sec.
mots 0 Ha peo TARTS Te U4 NC aera
sede avarat negra rstegeroemrs, TENA STMT OTT A!
aged qaend—‘ogetoed ce setare: stra” dita Seto
emf: 1 “ah sheer aed ed atte’ af Stern et | wre
Raecreseteny waree: | oreigay—erehet: ofeaisa anaghtt ata *
sft we: | amieg Garett attr aaa age siggesia=
“ogaeegar, aaa ( srg 1 sited aera rat wet arte
RU cares waa GorrsteneeaTETET aa sage: ae
Bava arene Sat a2 Meats 1? af aa: | GBH aAAA aRt
paaies, 9 oR, we GE ree, v Ate Rane, eR,
gaan. om,» ohne AreeAe, < aT Cramtr, 8 wey
te Sgr,

|
‘
|



--- Page 55 (OCR) ---
sraalsg: | °
ara — ad atieeeaegain iva

deren went sem asetseacara |
anita afaft veal? manta: us 0
(38811)
ard Beg wud 1 waite | a eRe  ( raresverA ast 1)
ara —( creed oenitigamadien | eels) sie
aa share eee aoa: a a | BR | sia

aR Aqeaneora astinte: 1
(aR fresred 1)
SRATAAT |

puree (mae Gee 1 GeaRST ger arated: | Seta RameeeT |
Freee AA: Rae eter ee ore age: a eng ara
Be aahiga: afige: deve afigenys: erges: 1 Raver: 181
poRAPUR eres rae den on: ora ee ree
os aearareat | ereteeiteetia Be’ eft Serene ren Fria etal
rests eres 1 Boa 7A Reser: Laer reaTAAE | Ra:
are | eed cE wey GAARA anata za Resta Sareat aT
re Bae gf Paar a ra erat ge eT: a IaH BIRT ATA
BGA | crore BAA GE oer aat uw? SF amATMA NEU
Hee Fe aa Sey a AHR TEA | re —CRREL T
rere gear | eat erat serous ag Reefer aera
Grne-w 1 ora Aerares aeraer weraeiiReTyRRSEEN
wnat aottaeaias sir ay gudiieten | er
arerramer aT yet Raa Ya | Agee
ferret | gfe framed of | gt craton oh
ater Gea | aeTaare MisBeat ag wed’ afa
sree Tore wee aeI— GATE Al Baa ra Rese ETT
veges AAT AMAT HTT aT OH YE GP STA: TTL
sateen eae alee a? eA eH GeaRten eared aden
sanedigaeT FTAA gH a erat a a APA |

2a Car. | IRIE, ¢ ont fear ot Ree
Resort ret a, 4 maEAAt wetecegsent ereaTihs MEERRTHNAA EARS 7
hersatarecgert atin, ¢ Teel —AA-t coat saa)
seit, ee. ‘tees



--- Page 56 (OCR) ---
< wearteat

(am afta aera: 1) .
Srnererqo—aatiac | ae Hee: | ( deere:
eter) aeaat wm RraReTasiarn: Reere ee:
tae areainattearan: Gebel w a Aare aT
faeera: seamresen aaaere: Aare TeumreiPgear: Hea
Pearrararaat 3 | ( Sei! ada dea a: TATA
(fafrer |) genta Ba Bales vithed_ Fater geRag-
faae | Bd a waar saat Heer ag

afi ne wi wae ERA FawlfeaTa TERT

Baomar Fea a 1 ad Rovere yaad WH
2 Be

Re aero earn aeag | 1%
RETIRE CaaS ator we: Fe TT
reset aA eeart owes aed aa, | TER we.
flog atgiia aries 17 de eer Rae SRE Fat
a iva a se: Pave: Ba sua anPaee: | (Best ate eR
ewe eetea: eae: eee eer eT’ AT AT AL
adhetar ami seamehiaiar afeaes aye: | yxAT iat ees afer |
arene | ara rae | ae Tah RT | SERB RT| TA-
gferat den: | Ger sagRT Geer wR: | seegeH oR
SUC, | ge ee 1 aL eT Bt FATE A RATT: 1
A aad suitewadnftel dea: | sara Rien aAseA ae
aa PAPUA oa + wera, wig, ay a: STAT: | gaTeB: | aT
kat ea: a eee ea: | ete FR nar ere: ea: TTA
ar marge fas wt ear | BA rae 1 Reet aE ATT
aac aitata gy’ ad ara TARAS Tee ABTA
age: eT ee | sate we! a fee
door: eradaitatin: | gaRterapacr: wuetareg Beer w? ef |
oman Fe ceaigeat Tt ga AAR gonPac: | sHaRe
Pearle aire, en: Ste wSiR, a Re, WTAE. 4 aT
ae, § Samat; mag. v GeETT, ¢ aaTEMT, § AETTS
blind afters; ercmengt & cfentaerrana, te saeeeHte tt
arte, 29 6Ate TH. ER OHO, TRB HOTT
a. 28 Te AA TERR, Ce TAT, 18 TT -



--- Page 57 (OCR) ---
saase: | g

sitaisfeoeeant
ated TaEKaTATea |
aed aay
aearardt vite carla wg: v9 w
(28 wars: 1)

Hrto—( ed) oi dyraPigcanayggagrrana-
ahange oe Tio eye Titan Tau AeA
n@vid deasticnaeialid eerie saat Ba ef 1
Contender) a quater ca Ba: eae | a oa —

waegat
Tore parent rcs

siete 1? a senea—srmt oe wat SrA: 1 SETTAB |

* ssitrmerdal:” aft AA aad eat agar senBReTk: | ePaaT
aamretergite 4 Fream: feea: ara arged ae 1 gfe MH alee ar
SITE TA | ut: aToTET WR SHAT: TEAlkeTERTET: get
Rat are oneal AM ae qe ee: ASA EETET aT
reer srertt wea after aft fe: ere | eerste: ger
aia: deett afr | wena | aa eeisar Ger ar whe
wedi: | gezad oP ft: creche 1 age Seat sare: eTETEEL
Srorae | tisgaerrcoearaim sam a aI 1 eH
were wa Gen | eR ge ala) ah Asie Neh
EN oN ae et duadionne 1‘ 9% atafene a ae
eae TC BARE [aT gl aT ae) ePRTATAT ATE
ara 2 gee agen geet ald ad Ba aye: Ama
Sor: RU: toe ae: TL AGT BATA: eeeaeT: 1 TH
araftita af Be ateaeaat fiemaaaiRert 1 aeaeT AE sea:
aa adiatd wemey | ereradings 2a Rate | srementraaT |
eater vags~2A sada A: ware’ a fara
GE MTEL STATA: ot EAMG | we Te ecto

Tate, Ca A SA aT UN vate ee Ts
9 BRET. |, vo, < Om, eTITRTNTe.



--- Page 58 (OCR) ---
to ere

are re eat ad Ree | (HF Reve |)
‘Rroaeae: |
( aa: sPtararenett afleaaeaicaaatt Tar FATE | )
aren -—( deiaadies 1) Ba aRraE |
fageri—anmag 4a ( # )
wai
usd fnSeng draatta’ ere art AE
aeaadteawitean seftereraea IST |
weraer gat Tara SR ATAT git

(@)
meres ear See aT (AHA FAA TE AEA HN ATA
qoateengh TET BAT TIT CAT: | AMAL AMAA, TITAN,
ae 1 ae A Raiden earL A ReIET FAA aH, TATCTETTEN marae
art. fat save Fags | 9 aera Ua gare: 1a SL
ag: reghen | ode, Sree: ae a: evel aaliceme, ve eA
alter waeare a: eter) seawt Ree adary_ gangicit
diaog: | Surssie SaaTaeReA | TGA Gee: | VeTTETST-
fame gem 1 anal BY aarafties ara we eT 1”

eet | aerci
AR eM were | TeeGate aed om eat
aac eamewa—aes esa gerorenet spate FARE: |
Sankey Rees weraeysel an CSB: ye A ArT:
ae 1 ord a cba arama wearege: | ert faite: site:
areaheereer BAY Ba eT | freA OT BT SANTA:
abagiqmai’: | ope: saqlahene: create: 0? RL aft
eas 8 ates eeIEMTTSe 1 award a ahePawe
eas A 1 over ard Gian, ag ReeeRRardlat aT g STE
BAC? | egret, TT MATT TN TT FATT: 1? TS:
area fide: setae | Gaia fae: 1 rater ate

ig stemrert-ferre OT, 4 OTE, § ATT


--- Page 59 (OCR) ---
aaaISE: | ny
fags — (0 ') By ayer ee Raa lag gata
a aaa a aaa Te ATTRA AaAATaTCRA TET Ha
aed wesae | (Rel 1) alana | Never araaea aA
aifiinreninnerder ramenergraameaaiadigeor
Bara: TeeHAReeaMATegECTaA A sai.
cearagentiartaqareegas wera aaaneraaey | (%)

(a) a ere ee ont ge ae wed) ot toe
wa Se cara argues ort moroaga Sew Maadieer Gi ase 1
arf efQon 1 Hea gra eaeE AgMNAIMsSimENRelrRRETER
CARaERSaMRaIGRe aaFagl SrHIMRRMANerqERSIE-

falar Rrargees altace mammgaaeT |
safer gat arama easive eeeel HA cel
auggs) weraea ama: wre: 1 AA RmeRE: LL agl Rare,
et re: Bare: A HSUTAATETER aTeT eae aT GTRNT: EAT
Bara: | aa asa Agamaier gf aA eH gai get Gar
2 aainatig swag | ga: eA BR ore ged RETA: AR AA
ara aataregeT aT Ut MAEaOg TAAL: embaesrea-
Langattenied at ara ata eared ara: 1 aa
attra 93) 13 Rearnideniearag aiefed as 3a:
age ited Meerea: sree: ST a: eT adage
Ree: WS mINAyTENA GS AORTA azar oINR: ARRATETOI: |
earorter TENURE THOTT: | TERT ATM: ATTA: |
meee a | re RETA eeisat Mal Nea areas:
weigacieng aga FAA AE AMAT: | ET Tet as GR aia 1
we ets fA A 1 eT A S| oral ae win: 1
agora err ey a: Sree: eHvOTNE BH Ui: TR
Oe ge Rei A rane: Ra: FULT: ama: Ba sh
agent dyge ae ga: Reger aT Waker awe:
gan aa) a1 a: Sha ater VERA T GIAM GRAM TIA
eagle aig iv ce | ga yor | wel: ETH ae
~~ qrwrngeee (ger). «mee FOL wR) Ber ory, tt
Cen) 3m Aa. vageon [ wwe | See gy ty ;
Te, ¢ Realty, meee, exwitees. » fetal [ As].



--- Page 60 (OCR) ---
wR wre

aqan—( arrentesier |) ag et ABATE sare:
eerone | rat Rt .
Adi areas gattaaae egret
ardearcanfirireattreait
aur aartredaeatenatatrarttataaaret at
aenedt rageaqreteastaatiar faale te
aft F1 -
qearafiandaarag gt aaa
aa aregtiadadagiants aol sry!
seranaarattertarear geese
aad BAY aeOTeaTS: Te HEATH LEW
marae & a gate: Martane adie eaitarat
at aa, qe 1 airoifeAat | ast alee aad EAT
Saran wa oreget gw oe a eB alee SUE AT
eat et TREACY TE get: tat rae eat aT
ear Sat Har AR aT Tia ene | ar Rese —HB Geel ae
aha: a BAA: ores 1 ree: BE RerwET getMREN: IT_ geT |
Se eal Stier: Bt: Rorawer aeawer se: Ge | wars
aeaat seraet aie ARR La ser ai
merger: 1 ren areTe HM es Bra ee” eee re
fae cea: Be ares 1 Rigcrsrrerat warmer exert Fe
ira: Baer ARE A Ase wel | SratregeReA:
andd: Rg 1 oer a Br amTssataHa eifeeT:
Ra: a wate: PPR a fara: FE: ewe: FART geeT
Set Pia aa ave ore laresar sewtadargereneee:
repr se RATE AIM FBT AARETATMAT | TSN AON
da: aR: see ge aA

a dee: Sage siaduaet GT wi aT aU:
arene ara: Fa: a Rend: a: AMR aT EAE GTA. BAT

iar aa were ATEN SAT SERIA aT RRL GEA. eT |
at: Se) wal ral GT: AAMT: TST GABA faeet a: Meg: BA
areit: eS: SORT: TATA: Ge: TATA HE agi: era Bee
‘fea Regret rage a feat | Ree RAO LUIATA at

{aed ao. x mie ge, 4 Sle. ve .
adie, < Cremtergrerarey. egrets
De a

TT. 6 GEA, YH
eetehs eet.



--- Page 61 (OCR) ---
STeeM EE! Aa TTI

sramise: | aR

Figo—(Reren ) aah arneghgaaaaaqRRReneTy:
cilearaaret Raivimatertanraag Maret)
wt—( Reet 1) agg grad sal | ga
aftvensitivearagbarerat

arae cerca gorge AR
fagra:—( Rats) a: or ag maar aaaeg-
Rige avatied gerd gaetaar Gea cae |
qeacleaaal eae: | (@ )
(3) GA aa aedamanetreadtarguieramal we
iitamieaeg Bitctog Meraerest (ex) aN” ar ae nerf

Horeafeigad reratioet vert quater ag et aa sere |
at aadieg c& final 1

Sam may oq ia aaa alge Ogi dean lead
Sree’ | samen Fea: | aguraréane: | mbeaT(ed aMNG A
Bfaga  aheaar: aemiaen: Fam: A ae gear: 1
aR at dara ef aiken: 1 ‘eget ond one eae’ eA ELE
at aa ef Sera 1a geaMRaT AA A we: Ba: Geer: Sea
Sele 1 oer saa Maier: aeiterleea: afi |
MRR | efter eevee) caates Ba gee al creamer alee
ata tivanagarel argeniaged a aan atime eget
ar 08 aa cw fayrenhe aiegwe 1 Rat eAraTe: Proae |
a Hy ceeTAAR a | we 1 eT: Ho oTIBMATaT A am
BE: UE Fa 1 os SUE: eer va He Sak TTA
ae: | BeserpRerme | agT gee woe oe Rew Pe ae |
Girast: ae gaat areal a: ame: 1 ow adele 4 ore at MTATE
serene 1 ay sear a werd eta faa we | OTSA Ba |
eareteese TOR NAR WARE Met ore fetige aw ae
2 oer after Gneneaiee. © Ge wey aE aha, ¥ ae
4 Prater, 8 ir, ate.» sites. < rere Ty (Rox ite
‘ee 1) eon GE, et Bea Cine. « enafeemn-mn-xefee ( Remae
sae) siogftge, te come, te air. tearm, 8 a
orreem CORP a. gy Rare) sae, GTER OTT at

Suameraitanist, Rewcateseno, xO. RET, a
Reegrrigoret ratte ceo, Rarormeied meth salah ora
R



--- Page 62 (OCR) ---
te ware

(ac: attest aetetat sews Qaetant ara Sait 1 )

gaagatiagaat seetraag Tee: |
Aerrerfesererrrereconatt enfe afaroreraeree: 11 Ru
frefterrpersitee: arly a)

we sae gure Sate ETI arent
qanizerta anit Sears TAMA: VU (
(a) parraetorqeh heaiftqagqeret |
faeeroraroreraret aver arieTATT
Raaroresarbnet wisRaaeAT |
aaremanerat aH Geers eae
‘gary aerate sarcomere Gare | Ages area BAT
fae: age", Boer Aft ea 4 geet reh-
exalegenmerenis w? ef ere: OTERO CATT TT TAT
a eget werden ea ea. cave ETT
i Raveg nt xem: | GEATAUAT 1 aha: alain: |
8 Ree eS | EES Teo oe eee
ant | stem qeare | SaRrTIgNedeT HaATTT wet rere
patter eter: afar: 1 daragger: eT
wea: | aga: Goer ormagal Fe @ wits: | epeieale WE Eee UAT
faeed a galtea: a gpa: erga iea: Ege gee Bar: GEABAT: |
exit Ra 1 es, eA Laat
Faia Ge: | armen THAR ToRTBTENAIT se Bs THEA NAAM
FRafSaeary ea: 1 ge ee 1 ager orders

aren | gage raha ea: | Ga tam AE
* qq: saat Faewwera: Sh sa eps germ: 1? eA |

feamSusreersrees TATA mH: | wie: Rzwatat Rem TRE:
ya | sitar Garmaemrendtet ora: | GUE see: | eu
cant qa arte: | gediat ands: eae: reat wen HRI | Coe:
memraet | ageTsh eet age: ek we ETA Tg TTA

Dp aeeragateestor wegareeat mize; ome: UAANTTTAR SIAR,

FEM.
(see. apernt ). vy fet (Ree). tora ( Tt)
anit ( seaftor ) Fete, ¢ ST Se ( ITT) Ae A,



--- Page 63 (OCR) ---
sramitsg: | 4

' ak eee) fe sre ere |
\
aitarat age @ Sovetet seam Tye |
SE BGI TACIT arisaaear:
ater dete errachanererngratay 24 u
Regret eer ert ner Fea aA,
aaameleed araPrei | (we )
TAT —( aR!) gah CF ArarATE |
Figaa:—{ sie Sethe Yet) wae aah wR
oes amctat Wt erase | (@ )
3 cai caw Rene Gc
() A aoe oie Rode sg oA sTeR Moro
EEE (a) AAR eA ak FN
seracteaiatent: | 608 1 gar si: Ger ae owen a A:
Barer: pane: nh ee Rate ale ficenets aa
reais seed aR acer ara: WER BIT TAT: Ht

omer eure | are: Rarerafans 1 AVS: tence Meena
area | fate sitareate—eren aft A
* sqreeh re? eG FaaramearE: tat Oe. RE
eamreet fan ala, a ae: wae aE we OTHE
after rca ae aerear: re: gd eaATATAT: Rea ae:
Ses: SHE: Sag: SaTary: deka PAefwa aera: 1. aewaTlt
fit Graf 1 A cree gg whe ede A gtr ere er
ae Rg eer asi Raat. eeecatteni: 1 mem wae 1
' sqradara: Sea: seal Ged ce sigeTTelaMa SE. ROR:
Ages gt eT: eee EEC Gree ore Gage EAR eet
aTtarearenfiiearot Grategeeataiegener tae sere: | TTT URAL NC
aaa metro fe ars we: GARR: eT: | gaara iS
iia, ¢ amt suttemret eae (eee)
a@) sat pa, ReTMTe. 1 oer. vm, 4 at
<, cramer ‘



--- Page 64 (OCR) ---
ae wet

ei feet) garar a we AGH)
fagan:—aq fe weaL| ( @)
natrat Bearers ea! (7)
fares —( eet) fetid eta et: Pers | (A)
Ratt —( freer ty a AR | set aa CF)
Fagan —( Ho!) al qa ae aaeA I
ares Barta afeait | (arse!) Cz)
h(t atte |) of sire: | aE GAARA!
( aft agind weeraic: |) ( @ )
Fago—( area te ITA TAGE! ) aE A
a iG 7% 1 itera seimasher | TD

2

|

Ca) eal aq car aed () at fe wa OE A(T) BH
axed | OK 1 (1) (6 RRO aide Hoel wtiaeg 1 (H) He oT A
eee eg we (Se ee a ae wet RR | ev TET
Bo afeary 1 ( ay ) UR Frome | aaron wie weaHe | (ST ) HO
caerting 1 1 HE 1 A ior eee |

owe cewek: 1 ree eaten ares Pe
au et: arr rer ah gees 1 FRE Leger ef eta

woah aearaer sTiqwrncrciaas wer 1 Reefer | FrseTETTET

Pema a were altent ) aa wT eee whe
EEE; 7H Sr wae, eel | Tee ey eH,
aan (att) ron ames sv ar Te, WATE, FTE
feet vg <a we HE GE TTS a ae
Se x yet er Tae aE, \ Mt (eats we TAT
pe tter{ et ae) ST A TANG, wa HHRSE feer (aT
gfe mera 1s eee Fag ea wath ee 1 (af
Sage meer), Ree area | rare!) ey

onorg gn 1 ore onfeweig reai fy FR: | Fy ATT |

aeqe—eere iE OAR | ee are Biers,



--- Page 65 (OCR) ---
7

SatsE: | tw

Yo—eS HAAS FL Geaeeat ARaT | aa I
Paco: dat FRRIATT | ( & )

natint—ale wi a 1 @)

Fa —( aoen orgs 1) sag seag war | wa: Rectan
FAR eats oot azar) Bq z | Ragnar (at)

TT —( Maer oe) aR RaTIARaA TAT |
Alisa meaner | wears Berersae Bt

fago—ar: qeang | Fema | (a)

iG Bi gat—wa ee wa wae
ear Tories Seno Ha: ERATE GAT
Fatdiraear | aandgiin aiAieea wiraeay | ( = )

TI awe 1) wae a aReageaagraaraTA
aieatare |

farm: —Al aes afte | Haast aa aa nae
all ree alert Peat bi a)

marcos | (a) fc et sige 1 (at) ag ag at
at sari Fe a 1 1 Font 11) or: aretesig 1 fH Bar
MRS ) CH Ra Rone ag ag Herta aE eMTANST-
srovacsdaftees aadt GsaraeeT gen emmeteat 1 aff erst
fitter Riewaa, | (ey) A area at GAY 1 af Sta eave Ge ale
sae sn are error FAR fea 1

© eA Aaw Misi ong eaai rear eA ore eT
fred aft wt 1 meat aan a aegien ot anancer
Felcemamarzan | Seaquendimenes’: | wer sere seat 1
ageternitereanierenety waa 1g anaaeane: 1 eae
sree ofa eam | aa enoereat ere,

{ary MEE Agee age, ene AER ey SHARE
BE aT Bate (ah) oe | me arte. 4 Fra seas, «Rae EE
grea | aT eg AG Se Aeros MEA ER



--- Page 66 (OCR) ---
itd area

IAT HARA eset BAY Pager eH HAE
atariAe |

ay —aaissenra 1 (e@ Pewee 1) (-& )

erat aber 8 eam: | ( HA arora stew |)
aaa ya ae ATA |

fagaa:—ararTTae 1 eg aarq 1 ( @)

(3 afemiaa: 1)
faganr—(somsttner) at carne | ae
f& | aPtara: | (x abe 1) (7)

Fagen —{ aaaiea efter!) Hh aaa here Bet |
waray aeTBAUTRAASAAPSA ANAM ESATA
Ra HaagaeyTdaniaangen terete gage
aamaaaitraariia aacaiar eee | aSteat HAI)

ara —( wrasse) ag aT aEEaCIACT |
Rel et

Ca) aer mies (wa A oA | | Ar
(om) Bi gk & rege | a GR 1 aoe ( a eka
Jaa oe rg 4 nesanalarorngraacerstiegeeNtaaTettaTt
roqerqnaenecarccardsicatat getleelearet_ Mer
ecg droit 1 a BIG |

Beate | never are neameRts aeed Oa age?
an aesrrmaRaeamraransat weterat Fa: seat Tes
Bea ated cata aor, | HOTA AgET Rw: a: Sere
fifteal a: Bearer: 3 ua atid Ba FaTGTA! arma afte erat
a 1 aa emer AST TATRA | TET TTA |

2 eGR, «TET aT HT a eT, 3 MT He ATE AT.
scree er ah, (atm eT) ey ENE. ag. AAT a Hate
am afte ma, to mR, te eT ( RNEMTTT ) BE
mee [HVS IA - a. t% a * -
garry, tree (erent) eeest ( wate). tv Me,


--- Page 67 (OCR) ---
maHisg: | ay

safigrantart: fieedeatat fret Perit
aaeAlfrea: seergaereions: |
wa iat pohteraiine: ameraqiig-
wilted area mesageiaat sat caret GAT WFO 1
aft a1

3 wecteras ex eedalerd gery
auntie i fake agai —!
a wlat
dercaigtidegeenfaaieas ayer: ngen

SENN | ge Sal seh gar: wR: aeraeT AYA: AME = TOT
seeds seq amr: omer ex air 1 ana GTS myRE:
sercdabeciett aay 8a aftagere set ae: Test
eet eR Me: 1 cee sae 1 sual set AgAIat sATeTAt
‘ore aa ree eat a: Hoa: Ret adiat Laat Ant aa
feo rer | aga coal ce ws eR
Stal saereetat (Ret: OSE: BoA veiPags ore AT eer: ales
ae tat Maat ners Aga Sat Ta ses STE
atk | ear a aoarhioer eoramer sueftftiene’: a2: meet:
Be gre GA: rr: Hwee | aEiereeare: Bae gated geIANA wT
WS UA aes: Sengd: eH Mg wa see aRNaNTET:
8 gegeT Tee gies ag gs agTseTS Sl age: Ga
Tere rearea srasReer eR Aa: | mea ga Ca eel Feel ale,
agar onan darts a 1 ozaggemertiegmantterd: 1 Pree
sere Teregeath anita orate cars | werwMRaT GET
Rftoena: ‘ gaaey agen’ ei By awa: seas silty
ar oeeaeat: Teagord cea ang MAL wat at ggeat
stores faftraer one erg: SERORTETT | rT fa:

“att eralrighealt age: eigangrdrrencraranel erage
Meee RR AlarRTTeTECTATTTA aAMTETETA ire
wrfiwatt a 90 sears: WeftraBereere: TAT FEATS

rafter in Se ee
et, § eat, aiReaetsrrert, « arse,



--- Page 68 (OCR) ---
|
| Re wre

Fagen: —( ore 1) af aut Ba ape aTRAIEaA
aaa | agra C49 Be: aR | (#)

UAT Aer PTET |

(ae: afl araeeter sraarer qahoeTiceat erater Maret
‘fear: 1)

qreaeat— ee aiaAAIe TTF wRETAA
ava |(@ )

mpatmrar—eag wall | (1)

arato—(siter!) ga mramai® ort Rak
eT IA AU ATA: BOATS A faAGPrecart (a)

qisaao—ali area aa fe 7 ded well | i we
a farcatifegarggeaiid eat Maier ara eat care
aa aanieat gat BEN aaIER_NAARTARIA aAisyeA-

(am) a wore 1 aga Aaa EAS 1 dazed Sea wat
ai aRernes 1 (ae) CS eames arRaA A merge wt
Ca) og oy WieHl | (t) area oer Ht AD AT ee
quel aie a waa BanTReT THT MemagzeT |

argu ae w area ater: Sen wR we: a
aargtt ait Adi aa a? ane: | feeds | fllarat wea
rae aur eat ize aaa 8: Se er faeadiizagenallit |
ated ovata exigar « aaalter emer (oestatt 2 mere
at) eaTeta 1 errr % arIa |
agra ae res agra aaa gfe aA eRe PATA

Part ¢ rently ara ate, y nein,
os frome, Ges ODREN (Te: § ATA wf fRTAR | )
aerate —taeg gol RUTIEAMoniaterveaentoeEsTATE CNT
aarogeneraestiand | erate — ag 4d | Brae EOP ATT org
aigh | Smaieassraraormen BEATER

Saucer earegatrearsitien geass] HaeA ear WEEMS
at at aigemertimatearnieae % RA wi ie
on foray | BR Brae Fe. & AGF BI, < HAN.



--- Page 69 (OCR) ---
samise: | Ru

Aaa SURAT | aaa ea ca A RTT
aa 24 gat aaa 1 (am)

BpaHe—Twg wal | (aT)

(tet: aieratia 1)

Sato — at oe ae a TeRireMaa aH 24 GT
face 1 (a)

arato—aa f@ % omAfargrMTAT | CS)

Spo are |) Hh waead ast | (=z)

alge o— (Frees create 1) aa} ana: RAR | aA
aalarareaaeaa ead aes BAT aa Aq) Fag] ed aT
were (sre) BA AIT BEATA AEATE ATTA,

“(8 ) Aer oman Stor Fea Ree ee 1 we er Pree
somepraiee wietie, RAAT ett wat ar FH armeT SaeeH
aa ay eonepgeRQRTETS Agar silat onarderfe eat |
al oS afte Rtre Cale Sx i eenetasrerdty alg tat gat Piereeeate

( @) areate ater eg wears | (a) we og wii i ( er) Heh
srit ag St eevtrrerard ai BA ort Foren (we) om eH
qari sorcong SAAR 1 (=e) wel CS aot GAMA |

eget: rereapeneege: ftom area Meare ese —xenear
sreoetade gases omar t aerate wer gua eet
Faia Beier aeuara ae 1 i OPA
remit age 6 wah UML | ae: ATART t ERT
a 2 xerite ereefeatae rae: aa: 1 Tea
safc ert a: 1 des are caine 1 otha a a: aise
wat ear 1 geianit  geniia: | agaaiedaa vote: aieremea-

2 agite, 1 cntet op. y om fet —opmeate,
st (a), Om IA (HAF TERRI ), © eR

aorta re | Ho Fe eam



--- Page 70 (OCR) ---
R AT

aaa aiReargatemar | awa ay aes | ona we
qavreol areramrarar eH AFT | (  )

ato —aasaaraat | (a at gear sla ere se |
rome.) aera Ga: BRMTATAT SRT AAA | eeTa
Rea Bag Aged fie aT ara aTRRSae
TER ata ara lamer ge HA TARE SE
aaa wa area aaeramaaTia Tar FIAT |
(aft genres area 1) Ce)

rato —ar aan aiterraraerge rat gE | (I)
aera o—aaeaianrata | (aa 61) (aT)

(om) or ca Aor ee a rt wrt cei
cre Se BATA ar it 1 Hg ar a1 ART sTONeY ie
i ove Hotengeaaeedit afta ast Siew eg oTeRT 1 at af Be
ag a0 1 8K A ek ater sa eT GRA (A) a
PA one 1 eRe aga Bae BA MART OE A aH
Reeag ged H we ee SEAR aH ora oreO(RE HEA
BE orgy (er ART aeRor RATER | TE eT
ae a FR Blak ie Bre coves TE rat  ) STATE
fee setores worard Toa | (a) S APM STOR |
aeoareh Loa eA GB eae GRE AS | ere BOE!
ay OHA ERTS: STAT | GRTATA A’ a A BT
xara, (Rr ea eH rer eT A THAN, |
rm uaa wont qaacen ” Tee “ore RAYE ”
wate arene vanes aasererremteeren: gents
sales ReameaTeaaeraeaaTeTeREATA A BACALL

{ sraaaarn ait ag gay ar Oe, = TTA,
ARR yma See we A oat aT gs Mare
Atta (RR). wor (ag) STA ARE TTR,
ager (ave) sf at Gok wate TARE, Soo TE SATS
(are ar) rors. 20 fret cot os Reagent HAR, 8 FM
ator ig, 18 TITS,

i


--- Page 71 (OCR) ---
seams | Ra

Ago are aa Rardl TREN sae
anrat cortege 1)
ATS |) aE Arata | Teas MF aT aT
sanggareadedt Haka saat were!
sranfe Heeaet Tea aaah wk
FAR 1 gracias 1 ( sede) AY aaa |
qaqo—( Meer) amariga: | ag sala |
waaay | aaeaaga: | (wt)
(ast areata)
Bto—at Benaaggraarhha gear cor
sierarreiat ararsrga: | (a )
alado—araa 4 piles | (a)
Cormeen Lareaget eat eae 1)
(a )ar wae ar aie Gacag cer aaa sirerqr Set water
ath (er) Bir ororact 1 oerg sig sTéraet 1 Ce ome | CAT 3H

fag sorseit 1 ( a1) AM eeeahongAierd Re ager eenetiar-
arard raing sk soe 1 ( w) SHA gstaereeé 1

afte fia) agAeants | genfia epare ee: gen: ana
garnet agar wide: ari wemage: Gera | Peta seer.
maa aqeinftrata get wel we ad Make agat qalgcretgen eget
ast cad ree: Sadler cer aaa: agaET ole ceT aTyafe:
wqeretie omaft 1 Baraariataerssre | erat ee 96

aR Sate 1 wt ae aT dat GAA g "TA Rare | ee
pre gamer fer sa oa i EM:

Carrara; Rey ees! es (ee) TELA Ae eo
adhe, vee, v eave, AEN STUN) STAT AT ‘eraemulht
‘Barre, Faget are TE TaN | Ro Re aT er Te
ety gent oma |. TARR. sreaTGE gs tem eR ott Star
frat Shce fRett | correc 1 RMA TTB
BA ecsreadit eA, v aT a aT Sy, < TRL ey
sarreferiter | arramiags, 5 one ReROt eee



--- Page 72 (OCR) ---
Re earreaT

ars |
serena fagratafererenitee:
AGATMSRGTITH IT |
frase wate
qreareadfaawar waa ti ot
aff 41
eomeaad afta encqarencad waa!
BaeaTETA See Ta SATIS
aft at

a a ware aifrenetieerter ween
siate—nfl afar aMaEAM: | age HERR

eae | CR)
Ca) afer atk oat 1 er ET

Segara 1 wate oad Hate ‘qnar: sare
amen area Fath gers & see SeaRMe eT: cHeMT wa ga AAE
dina’ 1 aa set dats armgia 1 semaalaead ae as wil
Rain aire Re sreaer wie: oF eater 1 ait ReP a7
ida eal Ba (AVIOr Ae reBerd: 1 ai Paieareaital | gat
aigte gargeis wie amagee eft Gat Ta Ta THA SOA,
Sige wena 194 dant gargd ada wh Slee OF
afr ah epuRigh: cece Gaitan 4 aT eal SAAT et
swerarerar ree, serene wre Buea | BT aT FT
fa qitat of daiormatiger coum seroma

SyRmTETeGRARa: SA RAAT afer: 1 vagrants FR gamete
ped af vere Feta} een ew eg GAR
axa ERTS: Sa STIL HAA GT: aM SHA SAT. ATA

ea ea wet 1 wee
1 ak fear i ote

fanaa: age
doe: 1 wala 3s wag af

cope ra | er are: vane TITRA ga Faad Faieasaial 1a

remem oF Geet: Gea BAA: | a OT ROA AT

dara: 1 ade raed qearmen(ala a: 1 eEVATe Hr
(Peer) i are. 3. 4 heey De,

(RR, « erence. ¢ MER THR... gHEE Te,



--- Page 73 (OCR) ---
sais: | Bt)

arate —3a fe ava F agai Meri T(z)
aPato—a cand waE | (aw)
( araaqen arate wart gartla 1)

aria —( tere!) gt RE a fe | wi
Furehiitraeesaeaa aa gee | coed Regan
Pataraartamdie year RA | (oat ear Rar alee)
aed weet Ca wraegaga Ba TARR | Sea
aumemagt gaPramalsela | aqendie ANA: eal
Saeed agergd qaPiel | (sual ster) ane aaege
gaya suid gar ea waeelity | (et ae 1 )
we agecay | amaa ais a Beret arta atten |
(A @PPecett wea 1) (a1)

(@) ars a sank Rent «1 (a) a Ge
aa (1) ea | ae SaTMta Ranier wee Sey aT,
Feet en one efor Regeeiee shared ater Bee |
vat Waa cox ord puaradt ce Gert GR | overt argeE Fe
Be am Poet Son 1 an ort Pe rer ee RAE GAN moTeS
gamst gage | oat Faeet aise oniteden Fart Gi a
ECE ot peat at se oR A Re. Basta eI
Gat Ge Garett ar eewreeny | Samet Se 8a sleet eed FETE |
Regard Miphag: ger Reka orenteaide sraarReancatld ek me:
a aa ee sere a RATE Tatoarha ‘garae oar aR

SIH | ASTHMA TAT THT
Srieeaagerarta: aenaat 1? eA eer | sre res ele ae
eanfita: | arrsiteen siarefrGerek 1 ARR, Sere cai ge

yeah at atta, Leese ‘aft octet afin
easier ey, 2 oa CORT Gaeta, Ae 0 are h,
Soh mie seh Car et |) eresetay eet co
saat |). < a game, «Te, Retr Hemerie
ng eae re ey 1 sf t
1
ox fen mae eter & fa ae
Sete a ee
x



--- Page 74 (OCR) ---
at eet

aqao— AP FaRIS TR sind SaafT ealkoars
sdtee | ( Paws seal) (ae )
ayato—( Maegghoremrante |) aid eaftaari

adie | (RR) (Ca)
fago—( eed atte) aft wae | (1)
(Ret Rane: gwHe 1)
ARTA AAT TE TATA TAT
ateardt ana aa gas: ada aa |
Saad atrecgingh watered
stegehtgel cengerredegitaieiaag i BR Ut
(me) orm water OR dad A Cia RG 1 ( sot
aera sites 1 (a ) Gi atete

aarargagaiaiantdaroreat ait geet affion end —laea-
wey mramoenrenA hgh: 6 orRGR orl Ta? ef ae: 1 sdtw
grey Meer: Fe reve Fe erm 1 AUR’ Fe
x fears: strane 1 wha” CE 3 aT | STRATA | TA
opeena erareat: FHf@rqT: GreaT: Ha: Reo Bay aUAY var aaa: HE
sat 1 erie aidaa 1 atifaeiteantar egaeraegertad 1 aH
anenel yaeray | saree errenet «afc oe Reet
diay granary, Tt Geeta: qaaa: eA ergat eat aaa
reqesiera: AR: naa sewisheTRT SAM ae | LS
mrad wet Oe Sea BaTATACIEN | eer edeaghige: az.
carat gaat g°@ siege eee cette weatee Rat fe.
come, TE aT AR eat Keane: | seat TARE.
weeniQRt mae | SHAT RMTTRRNG | aReriNeheaR wah
qieegege: Sregerardia, TeTaagaEt Tye: what Earl: 1
Squrs seareonn: werent | ardeRAeied gn) ort Rarfeagae
qagaaaasgraiaa sae: aaimgrguawiengelaa (a-
qanQanoAle 1 oar 8 BRUIT TTT RATAN SAA AIAT
shaag oe eA a gaeiteRTGT UN ea fa | ET

oni rer, = ofl cash, 2 FR. v ome, Rego, WMT,
eR at, § oar Boy star TEN EMT eA



--- Page 75 (OCR) ---
marie: | Ww

arta —( Be eet aga tart eet et 1) gaat
UAT SGI TEATS aia gat | ( etd Mowe) aera
afianlt 8 sitataes altar aged gaa) ( & )
UHI waRAATIETNTA: deaTPaviscqeNlh
algeia: | dale aftmané: | 3° aga |
sqaderraRate et qaatt Riera!
aftaogar gaa Rafa qeaftad troft uke u
AG ages | onararearacha aie: |( sf seat aan)
arTitet——aei aaa 84 | wag | aaeaht alte ah
aif | ( ta seat eg eset) gy fg ar Reg | AR
wattear mar BGA Pata aes sa: [CHR os sere
fewer) ( @)

(a) ed ort Bh ron Sort sea org alte Ro ar a
ER ANE oxeT dati A aya Sg (w) wd att
Rea ag a org RE CUA, | ea et | Harte eA,
Fat or aRRRt srst seit

Berl Beet aerargrafeie areata afters | ata areata: gar’.
caiired gaat 1 sedeoragraned Mat Sat 8: | orealeefansteat se
Revi: 1 aateaTl® | crt feet dae 1 gRomgan ge ERAN
frafha Gar gar qaaft oa ga ard Reo, aT seaeeRT ae.
orale ort Rant wd aaa 1 somrdeRe | oT weet

t ered airy et Bea, 2 (sees, weaT)
Rar. Av Rea, aR, gen. © aR
rerattiareeafit—nisd. ¢ meh, ¢ Fee, mares te sie,
tea cae Raiee weet Rares, ca aGEMeTa Ae,
28 aft Bost, aiReremateTeh Me, r9 Reap TSR. ude
tse mgs 08 G1 a ot RE
aeprertane Ae Rite:

snterfa,



--- Page 76 (OCR) ---
xX Tee

ars sear, | )

aA eegargaa Terr wittnfaceanitor
aearenni® fafatrenf seat wears PeaTTATy

eee erred gee
para pera aes Sar a Rn
( @ Rewer: 1)

aft aehaniteadt ar varitsE: |

mrerarvaret carrey | Bai EAR oe | oA
Recenter rat Pre Farce sree Ba Sgeeeh APR? ee
fas 1 aa gute cast Ba erage Pes tegen aha |
wee ever | Farrer rar aia enka Peary Bat at Fear
war at reata | witeeleerataremrae Fa: | dara aT are
ans area: reves eat ten er aerate are
wet: goort exegerormedy Ty sat qereaeiea | oF sata
Faso dee | arkeRetted Oe U RY uw Heian: aE AF |
aged aren ‘ cureraltterdfteriranarre, | aid Rearitag Fam
aaset Miter W? EL
a caredidierat erisE: 9 t

Poem SR gare, o eaG Gay CoP MTENNE



--- Page 77 (OCR) ---
1
(ee seat alfearenceangeat geet )
aeian—-a fg @ Rei gart aq ee aiat-
gat Aer va A Kaw amar | geen Gat RAE
( srasidier) ) aetiar ag Agta eaneT) aUratat
seat | (& )
( eat afta Aaghrer 1)

Frgtirer—-( afte!) marta | aaraReR
smal wea Baa | Tea: WY AAT AGlAra: | ATT
AES Perea | (xB vee) Ce)

Bto—{ sae!) we Agi dart a Reraieee
wad ge Raat amradieiaisierralt | (7)

Frgo—aei gener | ger gent gy evar Trae | ca
Fag aa Peraer aor | er fre Hal aefaramae af
oaaTATaRT aia AaITIAReRyT AAs RI

Ca) ek a FE ae vr aera MPRA TET
Rrorag arate 1 ai wit ga ga BikmeaR i CMT | Fratton
a2 Ba orervat 1 at srt Ot gReeeH 1 ( @ ) arate wate 1
roomate Raere | Bee g RE RAT ga 1 at for
iting eco, (aT) GE MeHg WE eI ge Arkin
feoton Mor He Are a ovation FR wafRwaAe

ore want Grea ecaetsemet anita
Praferraigatankei: aad seemrecrrereare satacemig. Aue
arn: eatery: Rageial Bead wee
after: ot era ona: get Beer. eearaRCEIEET 1
eee Rae | oranda eGR GeRCTRAEMAR Ie: | wATAR
Sa sector |stats: ales ot ae ew gE
saa: | TTT st 3

t agaqe, Ree, 3 Being sengree GAL Tata eeaT ¥
sult wiry ora wie, SAE om. ost ACR. <a

eur (atarea ) Se. Tg OT. § eM, Te
wer fH, 12 BF; Hey Tee,


--- Page 78 (OCR) ---
| Ro eae

maar: aga aaeat BAIUNSA Pat atteadiie
afd ened aug Sea Barf 14 ga: ga afar & )

garat—faael aaifenrgs | ( @)

Prginst—ale cer ear 8 aet_amive yea
Raverawagaat agar aatgg aardt | Tae
aa | seal’ Bem: erat aReala | Cat)

(fae 1)
ae

(der aR ahaRawaRaRteraeaTaeaT ate aTaeer |)
arate —( Feder 1) agar sete era | FATE.
waa gouramrlageta | ara 148s Ba a feet:

(Cam) Bo wedge 1 cer wea a ge EG we a RET
cqroior, | ora Fs mar ARRoaTaa erates PY VandaraTaTa eT TIA
ara araTa oseganeamniesst Bact aeet Vee TA
at gana ReARE Hiceaiaie afk Ok gard su Ry ARE
gai om IR Gfeaat 1 (ee) Mame arenfest ele 1 ( aT) ae
far Aq & Reradt aren aféehasesattetageren ages
fer seataet Gat 1 at Hse Git ong She wend Mera
ern ces are eT Dees 1 “TargTaH? we ef #1 get
caitarat Pag  am | egeracrciarnie Ge: woe | GET
nei De way after ue TeRThe: | gaat TO gear ett
ahem, 1 adie: Sets: afer aQGer Gat: BERT: AER: TAT
‘ar eaten | ay Gor ares | rere Sia | Ceat—‘Heasgee TT
Sramrandlina: | orgaareltta: od Rewea oar?” x ee
QTR ee agar: | or aeTAMAtemEMiR TA Te
STTEMGAET govakeqvecat gama Pree ATEARTAT
afanaerata ffagdaame creaennize: aftredt: 1”
eR cere etre: Be GE oMATAATIR | PELHTANTIE: | Tee

PATHS. rere we, 8 eel He. y CReter) we,
Smog, TTS, 4 ost For, w Ue AT GT aT wee, <BR At
Frater Rate, § mE aTate, pe feo Beenie | Prge feet TB. te
rate, ctor gor; mr eag Moragt tose et get mE it
AATF. ty Teo,



--- Page 79 (OCR) ---
Betatsz: | at

dant ag a4a aha ga Agafrouateagl 3 yzAT |
ai aiaqia wera: oy nedafiatd aa ofteast
aomsaalanhtd aagreaa ee | ser aT RA TIS: |
aamcanlaa etaqa eaaihay | (44!) wag | Hae
aragarareh|( #8 anit) qaaeRgaIga ikanReguge
yer ais send a esi | (HART) reat BARS |
(a8 frower 1) ofan a meganiticm aTURrATA SRA
Raag | (seeraer |) aera Fsteeais ara
Batic aafhnd si Bear aureeigd aftearis | (aeaes-
amr yeu aa sae adial Rover) qafy AsRarewsa A=
saattmammeaatt aa ae area aaa ea
are eek BRIOA | (wh are Fae |) (mH )

(a) Rover Belly cet 1 efor onerratieraan gaeIETAT-
amen 1 oro st 1 Son cea fable RAY ar ot ag’ g Gea ge
Wag aRootarh eit & deer SE ot ads set gE ae
dad 84 wei otter amtganstad sol age 1 ee
are ar @ ge RE oomgattemltea ge wot orm Hale! A |
oro gra Serenged 1 ame garTaE MftraaeregUET AAA Ara
arot oer OF RE | EAT SIMETG 1 SEARLES
‘Feet wes aire gone sala at ota at mae
era oraaaatteg & eftat aol UAkmer ableciiiee wltea | we A

me
andar eitrore eit aie 1 ae sige: Bt 1 AT ATE TAT
angi Ba fee | srercratta | aaTweT aie eA ea
fafien: Gee: Gu erga da © ait: 1 opagtSeHe | se: ee
aiemerereernargiit cr R Gerae gata: | wet anTIsea
are seats gate et: | TaN aerate ATA ER
2 are, TOA SCAT. MEAT oTzeat fer. 4 Sem Ae
veh fie, v TAREE THRET. 4 OT aah, ¢ of ( afte ) ge Hate,
so ot era an, © ore rere Rata, Asie. oh oT, 1 NRT,
UF TVET, te ateaTATEy ( oTeTaTRT) Cy nae (sy
‘Heitor FY. a tee Ho, Ug wag HoT ge, pe TETAS ARR!



--- Page 80 (OCR) ---
RR wueeat

(ae: seal aeizar 1)

geo——zareaaeies | acattartt 1 aise Feat
eee!) oat % Blase arent | fe aa Tew
feameda facafeardt a at Bea |. wag | aaaATAT
zie Rare Preenerrar BAessKeaei | ( HE geatseae
ferear eg waivgs ) af walfOlRaa: | ay ATR BUY Ft aT
a Brora AMET UAeERAATAAT | (-H )

aito—arteia: ag RAN: | fe greRaTaET
ata aH ae: Hag eae |, (Seaetateerg™ Maree
winat eine net seaeaeh Rete!) gai Bane
gare | a@ ga saa 1 (a)

Geo—(siker sores |) BSH CV FAISAL

fee: 1 Ca)

B eaitaade Ba oat AAS ere cat A aes GUE oT
acne Sera err ot BORE,

() GS wearer Reena yar H Rote arodtan |
fe Sa car geommustteaciterar For RR onteaerdt ot a Grae 1
BiG vat ara & Aad etter raced ar see 1 we Har
Rear 1 gene, rg are aT mt ere AT TERE ero
teat 1 (am) ania at GAL 1% am HATE MAEIAIS-
aero oH (RA WP GHA Reel wea aT sa
Car) af a ar ay GH oulRA 1
areal went STUER aT: eT | eraeTaECReT-
eoritrsneae | Grae TAR: | ATTRT
aah al aa ge: a areal eaTT Te
Praeaargeit ef alas 1 areata gar ur MaamareTaed Ba 1 At
gaan oaf@aia, 9 oad wear: wt aera | sett oe Be

Tarai nea 1 awe, wteaeclee, wee oTtt Tyl & FETT.
fecee, trot samters ad wy as creat are wt

Tera ROM BEML, TT BTS ( THR
Seat) apa bayer iets aor 9 se Meer Hwee

Crm gee flere gg rent ) oft dae (refs) St ser 1
eet wa meena amt) A WO nts) one

ea mareaneey, © of Fg, < are GOT CRT TESTO AT if
Seer ny Spb aarti one!



--- Page 81 (OCR) ---
See

Biase: | BR

AT o— Bee, |) Te TTT TATA: |)

Fao—( aero) ag F gee | ga EET
Raat se | aaereter Aart ata |
( att wale arate eRreaaRaa ernest frat 1) ( we)

arto —( Res erage!) gaia ITERATE,
fear | (1)

Gto—( Peer) af Rast yal | aeaRAAT
arta snfereaearent Hat UaueReat | aera
fe attaeRRa | eee area’ garar 1 (a)

ATO ( wert Ta!) ag srreTRH laraeT | ( Be
tet et ager wma) Haas aa ag A sar | TTT
Be aT a scan od Tard Aras | ( =)

Bato— APT ar ears | fees araTTTTATAET A
aration atceay | oat aa a aiscag Gd gard Tea

(Ca) aR camera ert wat ( er) ad Framer
gt Bei Foro et Aa | at HE A eater eRe wR
(a) geek sie ay ord oer niet (a) SR sare Sa
wie gy ART enfORReT cuftet a ee nfeeer 1 at iimardar-
RM ye Con HRA | AE ca Bat RPTL So ee
aft Revairg 1 Reread gH mL aT ae RG AEE TGA
at Ut gers STARE |
ers eet oe et | safe ereok RR, eT RATA
erent os: eran. | ware ear crea wera
a sorcana: | grsrdh a fat sien adteRad Hae
ef sraAAR arerde, | See crane Reman eae SHAR eA BE
~¢ (Fave coat qatar ) wig TGR ko. < sieak eter Ta ee.
Ug, arama, wero, v aera rey Tee Ree
WEIS, € AE AT ST Te aah STR. Y SOTTTIG, A

sami ( rere) eho 1 BRE ee, KT aR Ne

a, ¢ # out se (ome aaa



--- Page 82 (OCR) ---
ww wae

aa BUA | Cae Gara azar aA APIA |
ere eTeT TETAURTA A BEAT RAT ALTE |

Aio—altafnartian shea | sciscaiyaad 3 dare
aaa | (tarreat aah) (@)

eo araerat ee eet ear) aR AVATAR BAT:
afte | area aiftorer afeire gone TeAT A
area | (Poster gat er area aerate waa niebeoath
3 eae fem afefioat arate get FR 1) ( a)

AiTo— ale araaat aes preemie a
wea: LFefteaRReT SRATAATTAAG | Ay ATA | (

(a) aft aren 1 “1 Stee boarorone err gor HR aR aA
econ Bhar | Gee rar 97 Saf wrath ok gered onereRle ae SAMA 1
argon Tranktehig enfRomrg ape srovdin Aizeae | ser AF Ya AKA ATA
wea afterae aftr eer geet arate 1 (@) at & afr Ge
weed AAR ator H dent ABR (7) of eA aHETE |
mia TaN (RAwons teen Ganere ot Mle wf sO.
seit 1 ( ) GR ora Cant wARohraeE AoMTMeTE | FS URAL |
whe erect ent orarGlR 1 oa |

va? 1 eGR? eT | eT BTeweaT a BTA
‘atatconadl Far qeaes | SF CRERTRRTA | ETRE BTRTTET
saremen eereaegern a eds | mar 1 fewer aes 1 ame fel
ua emia | ea a aa: 2iq1 aR wraRed aga gurela’e
aged axed oat We ema goad | ay She 1 ZHIEA-
aay ore A st 1 era oi eRreMMTer: BAA
Repararattatea fa aia aartay | oa a SATIRE: TRA

paar, i
Pr ituakind hanas Suacsr tea i aaa akc
fib gor eave He, re Big, fg oer Re wre of fon, meAlmTET-
score ath ame UOT TU | CA Gut Mew). v me

(ait art) ata ae oe meena (amar) |

FE sore oreprst aie MS aTeTRA 1 TO He,


--- Page 83 (OCR) ---
farttsg: a

geusmget wan gf gaa erent
Rraafta fed fa aot eet a Raa He  (e)
(ws)

ans deragd arene: agers ae
waren griftt terawacocoftnftroltemeire |
efor: SierarPaaTe:
sraatsa gag: aiaaie quate weg: 0 eu
ait |
wd atttelgerrorrrararearey aa
wea southasmne Maia stared ata
( &) grewoguell oer gee eat eat |
Roret Madi Ot act aero Helle
(a) aft mete nea amera |

agk Ge Aaeak-gda ee 1 Gea eae ee gem gare
Foam one alter arg | sre: Cedeuida atareAganerTi
rae 1 ok Sea Feta: Ber aay eeraTe—weT BAe 1
cath Seager cenegaa: awiey aft VRene 1 aa: eer aTaa-
goers ead: ae: ae: BHT TOL | OE Hira easgETE
Rast Radian | sia: Ge aS ae ae TEMA: a PARE Aa: 1 aay
ached wan afer ae aeRO ac HAG 1 Ama aR
ara: wou qos a1 agUaT ores see:
fia: 1 sraaids Gamreae eager aaaat gel se
crggredt: | ort eae: ame: OB Read eee AgaaTle wxeeT
fee: eaead guided seengt ar ager a oa: 61 Rout
ft emer 3 se: By we, aA FAA aaa
sR wre sere sear aot a:

fra eran

1 eaarer wae RU ETS abe aes | gecraataTet

FEAST oraa: GeINTA fae: 1 Geeaathearanatterd:


--- Page 84 (OCR) ---
ae eae

gent Aredia aiea aeteeRaoraige uk
gaia ——( aetna adngere ea! eT!)
ai@ SRaiee | eI ay Tea gs CAMA! | az
aareRerraat araRarera: | (eT Bat sk ae
spared Rat" 1) (& )
aro— gama at eat Ramen ofheet | arate
aA d Bea (Ca)
gto ——afi ga Rael Faneta alter | 0
ag aftucneraal aitiaiasregaremaal geart: | Fae
feaayitar neo | aa) eagaTa: | RTTSITET
agelarerer aeaURe Gear HAE | ( 77)
Cae) at SH BA A Gaudet ah
arohtad Rarafterrrrarit ofaftor et eater Uw) Bee IT
Peemegel aa tea aA SAAR (a) oT ot
fa ferret eitea 1 at ag afrersrra) enftorraa soenltot
eraser eet 1 Pett Afton aT HAAR | aT OE 1 wf rT |
ea SEE amet
wie caver af | Rea: Ft aragleala
aegrae Pat: Beater: owVara star: Ged aeAafe aT:
aor of: Vera: | Rarer are Ge Ba ARIAL BEAT
rena: 1 68 BE ee TARA lee OTR AT lm:
ar sega GH mT | rai raat sea ae
er 1 wgelaatied ae New aaTeral Mem: arareteAraare
aftr, | eyfeae A 1 gy Raat aati Rvemer eft ar ghaat
estan, 1 WR ere Fhe Roe ar | ar sa
fefoemRar 1 gar et sire: are: 1 sre sastAPRAel gar: | et
1 afar Sega | seg «ate Reet mal? gereal,
os
waitin,
ee Be TTT. RRR, ¢ ote! ocea HUTTE
TET TAT MRA, Ter EME Te rlle ee

are
ore
fe,

za:-

-.
orion aroma) To, wo | ( RA Powe), i.



--- Page 85 (OCR) ---
faeleisg: | ww

Ai o— Be oe a: | ( aft ftomla: 1) ( a)
(3821)

GO 7: serine | (Cw)

Arto —( Meier awa) gens gate gael a gee
are stereo | ( a)

Baio —( Ferg ee Rees 1) aft arate ar RAE 1 AG:
alae! ademas: wea: | (a)

arto—( saurtdied |) af guint aata: werd
aa 1 (S )

aerai—a ght aha aba Xe uae ag
after | aa | agama | (=)

( 38 row’)
(ear afta BB fages: 1)

fagaa:—at @ a: ouesinrarda | ag X strane
ara aia ag) Sa eeaa Ba aeeheat amar
Ager a ReatimaggaealaRen sient eae
RaeRyeal ea | saAReT Raat aire |
(a) ai Ged aR Ce) a Ar est rater) BR
an sitfiert git St Gawd ones ( gy) ae wR aT
FALL AQT saat caraTrae! ae Ga 1S) a gear cavieht
weewt 1's oe RR er APN AR
a SiG a i
wera: tote 66 eae EM
Gr Rare’ aque Fania Reh ae eet
fareeett RR 1 Pihaerat afeaeaOr raat erat ahaa
A Men: Ram: maT wea 1 ae fou feet |

Chem Fa SUTIN, 4 TAN, GMO UTE A cA,

v seater me, aval, ame. at sTenie A mre | aoe

RRUCNE stare. GM. MTOTSU, oT HE...aforsh HE CT sre oy sem

im shaft ere Race) one aie

woes BPH UTE. Y BOT A, ROT -
¥



--- Page 86 (OCR) ---
Re ere

( afereatwaen 1) os ey BeaaETRTT BGT SAT
ar TaeAR at AaATeAT seaeitia Zyhat RAAT: ae
Ewa #4 cameo | aeratageastia | ( % )
(ac: afta aan a |)
aiat—( Fe!)
squiienterat Gages meayeRt eT
glare amAACACA ITA ATEAA |
ardtarawartint aaqat aiehareat at
qearetnauzeula gel Feat aieTTaaT Ue
aqavaqvead nai aaraaisartt arate |

Cam) Ba a ratek orator ng 2 RRarecis eta Ig |
or Petter Ba Be Sie eT sa agen Her eae.
gaiqrodisiatear seed ot ata RniRiel stad
ad 1 at org ger Rerawredl aglarear | ost fora oe
"Ques eae WAR F shat were Fer Bead Bead
atagadianh a ores tat ara at Saath 1
‘aaa eae Paras | aT
sara. \ gaat gam Soren aeneat awiew | TREE Se
remit aaa? aR caret: | Gla see fased aA we Gt
weiteanf | xa eat GERARat areata afar TARA oT
anqraeat aii ea ore ga Roar ateaeTIAT Gea SAA arzAr
fake Reet ger aaleltaenyia efteni 1 ave: ere
ame eGR TIAA + we: 1 adienivst SYA
cata es | at: Bt ae: eg 1 SAAT TPH HH
om sew even, | Rowegeed FRatier Tegel a PAIGE |
ada goitaare | 98 (aARETT | RR aeiepien: at odin) aa
3 siRoaT gear wiles: pai qT THETA! GAT feds ded:
eat aera Rrrarat aes erat: ew: rare BETO
dua Rede Saar tat NRE HAL UEHARA G

oe i Ge aalG yer, eee
vwPea, \ ears OTe, BI Sire eT
ie ate, gearematte, 5 HRA.

eg) Care, Ue eT A UTE OA | TO,



--- Page 87 (OCR) ---
Racttaisg: | cy

fagaa;—( eeieae |) sag sag Raa | a
aaa Peat TA | ( Ror Rote shea Be Rae eel Aiea
aghenit ie 1) ( =)

Tare & Re: | aR afaehal
Sra | 94

avy siguitaned Gat est aftr aghi—
seers lei abil
gd wanodicaracaar @ Feargreat:
eat a8 meheafaFaes gaffer: 4 0
aaa ail aa aad aqasara ay: GeAGTA |
fagra:—( set!) Gg Aa (Cw)
UAHA: |
( 3 ard aferra: 1)
fagaas—( ore eee coe ard ater aL) a

ara oR sermay | (1 )
aii |
(a) 18g mag Rasta 1 Ar gore Ratt agit (@)
REL CT) A ates Of Tere |

woh dare ariali—a eee | “gag Sem: ge:
‘Reg: 1 gata aera: | cet ad alt Siequrel ex agi: ae gaa!
arqwarg eat ceiah gates ake a SAA gaM | eT
Reva: 1 agags gas aera 1 we orcas Y seas
dave Baraat wemaeaTatHaT: Hua eeaBaT aurEeT:, ASI
anrat Raermendtat AA: guPiteTeTT; Fa ae sitahRe ce:
wed Gear ona ga: ier: | ag TATA Geers wEaRha
aa o-oo aqanaga & wears Roam | wEERA
ay ReeargTey 5 ERorha: w gH Reet ea: ETT



--- Page 88 (OCR) ---
Bo were

fagra—eatragorsl ASA ya: aaRte | CF)
aren — eae fered aT | FO fetadiana Ha
fag — A: TI BY ees TT | Tay AH
and Tea aa ART GAA AAAI | (A)
rat —( at get gat 1)
eaararfird weeragt oteaHTaet |
areargeare Matte Hea Aas TTT SU
(4 Rea) ge ARATE |
Pegg: —( settaees |) st: ae eet walter | (RM
qorsmgera |) a: eG fH ear ge aeata aaa
AAA afee qed LIA Regarnergieet wesiF
qtreha Hea HORS FSUSUAT gal eal ara |
(a wage 1) (aT)
yet —( Peet) eh aero SCT | IR

at areal’ | TBAT |

Cam) tite aserrt AR gt otal 1 ( w ) aE vege:
aga ed HAR LT Hg HH eH TEA aT BART AEA ae
Cor eee ovaries (ayers wit et eaten 1 on: arelte_
Be sg a Ae wera TRA | oT AE ETE | Se IT
Agnaaiteregiedn coe "IR fr GUTS TA SOTA

Seer eg Ca age wer IEE HAG EEA.
emeae AL 1 eae teh ay OF TERT OF TET GET ATE
Sengred vee, PRR orgs are eae ar eG a
21 om wig Gree: | Maes: AH i |

vec eae BREA

fe pin. ard, a8 Fee, GR, SRS AS
epee. career ag AT eT SeTERA, ¢ sreetaisn-( feet)
at mare eH TEA Ser enitet A AAT | Te

reat veer at THR sTeTe | REA oe Tee A

(erate 1 graft wom: eyAreaenes, te aT HH eee aete
ear ope. ermrare ete (fhe),



--- Page 89 (OCR) ---
Belaisg: | at

( sararefaa 1)
fagts:—( steel) Sy sayz ai car ataar APs
aa als ale AAS arate: Lai sqeaaa-
wae UATE 21 gaa HOR ae HEATER
fear a Reel Bo | aera aT Te
feceareeti war ulead | aeraaRiA fh aaaTe-
Ra | aaa Bt t gereas | At aes Fh Fae LC )
Ut—areld ata | baht eewAsqunaeea
aaa acigaisye: | aaah salina
Berea Ga ereaeTeARAT |
fago—( aifeet ear 1) at aren qoetieel aeEL | (@)
TT aa GOH] | GANA HEAT |
fago— a car ane ae a esa | femeT wa
THAAD Tsai wee | A ager Bassi
feat ar ee aear atten | (7)

(me) A corel wt aT Ca ARE Gar Uy aE a aT
eG onfeRT 1 ae sseTETTRRA wort OrTRTA 1 GAA Cer
role aig ster ay ore Ue oR ARaT | "BHR LS oredr grate STRAT
TUBA TTR TRA ay ag AMSA ar storararANTaL
at GRR ora 1 WUE ao eR LAA MoEE fH ORL (eT) A
ares Say | CoH as OE | (a1) Her ar ie a we eae
wonemed cael Ts ea R eigen ew | aeam
‘ger snfeheg: ar ey som geist |
aon aitran Sa lke eRe SaeGTIRE HoT TART GA
ere am: Cee HAT ET THAN eT | aN RE

gerd | sing: rata: | AareraigerTeR sremaECH sea TAT |
goer aeqaTaT aRRTRTTAAT gee BT

“Reet ami gree wares At RA =
itoniene qian wart ug Roar eniter 1 gets. 8
a embrgiamara:, e sifte, « aa Mya: § ognita—agia-
walter rere aOR, < TATA, 8 pes
AAT cor wom eTET CaP HS woe Ve ait Hi nek
BT aT ga None oat me... eee near



--- Page 90 (OCR) ---
# qeareat

arat—aaadaeal sae | AMARA AE EA
wea | ( eens: 1)

gaa: ae ga aaa aPaag | af
aqatanta aioe oueaeaTtA | FAAAA | FARA
aarenraareTaata | ( % ) -

amt —aer a Baw gaaiarenshe ea |

figra:—ar at wipecaragae |e a TART
grareagear Ba earearea | TeZYA | went FETA
eat anfeer areas | ( @)

aragonite, | ( gree |)

faqa—— At ae oat ag eIlRAT aeageat aged
sre = wee: GE AATT | (AT)

art —aaer we Reaver at ATTA faa
ate |

fagaas—at qataar ofa |

waar set Tea atTAT
frei Be eco ered AeA (=)

(%) a wore BE aH AURIS HRT GR mae SATE oifeit~
eng gardawend 1 ae gar 1 ate eR ietet erer8@ |
(et) A a Bi WeeerIot Bee | ord & er Bee rot weet
eoemigeeny. 1 at gee tore FAY GeBTTR co Tat eHRoM gNT
he (ar) Aa aores gar ag arta areteatet qed seam fet
Rend oft seer 1 (a) a OE cae RAI

gorsrongerett war get seer otal |
Foret Pe eat eo eet ot HR

GCA HRA Preqwnen(H ea cas! eT GHOUTTTT NN,
niet ‘aiRentarave: aa! Ha UATE Beara AT

2 Aref: aetora, ¢ ate ct. 9 APO... 5H, VR,
arg soem aroimrst BEE strato. § wheats, wR Bees NT
ag fear me, 5 cd IR



--- Page 91 (OCR) ---
fataisg: | ah

att —( ie) arf wars MeTATEOH GFT Asa
daearae: |

fagrs—aa: fh q afeaam | (-# )

eI aae |

Agea:—fe meat 1 (@)

Tse -oraitian Bacarra ey
Frercteg |

agen; —( Miter |) as FARRAH: | OHA
a ama aor aaATRReae | sea FIST YAR
Saeed Fae | ( emer evaiafealt | ) (77)

TT ( ree |) fe aS fegadaat aay
fear Fagraras sft va |

(38) fae 1)

fegra:—( Ree) Heat ay sasiqeta HA |
aR ( eagaua: | (a)

wa

wate gdancaat aera

(ae) FO warm oh (em) Maret (at) a URE gee
ACL SH ce Fe 1 a er G seMTEeTCOR 1 Some! Sr oT
sparen ok Mogten «(et ) At War ay sored oN
at Ot 1 ag EE
agen og 88 car af RY onRAR BW 1 arat a Farat
megeaedt rate? rat are steal | ‘ara a1 Ce
arerararat Sargertt: ? Q(B ave eeataiRerd: | rahe oar
rat aaa | BiaaamPoraamTR | aA: BREA: | aq ETE
epents | sea od a Se gaat | G84 aes 8 GC at

Pee 2 we AENTOM oy | SEH; GE we el, AL
eorget wena rete, itr mea; ew, nT— eT TOY
yeetart vga. 4 ereT we, « meRR Aare TTT Arse
shrefiguoccazer. © ( aBfees |) sige. < fee § raat AG
aueRe. po a. CU RCTBAT, 18 er ae Oe oT HE
ty Re wore aro a STE ET, a



--- Page 92 (OCR) ---
ae eernaeat

age: Rlggwantarted
‘srarat araorqenfefaeaene 1 ¢ 0
Fagani—aalg 94g | ( ees!) (FY
Pgrn:—ai: waray saciney | areas: | (@)
(3a sft 1)

fagra:—a: var area yt 1 aa aPRAaHRTeE-
qeaqerentee ferme safer ggd Berea: | (a1)

Tae Fa |

( aera: 1)

Us —( Freer 1 galerie ga: wit)

fagra—( iwitstder) a: ea agetzaaito
sear: Fitaran Tato weer | CASA a ame |
araat agit | (ek ade Fer Sawin) FE aay
Rear aa 1 (a)

Cm) a OG oR Cae) a or wettoco| LTT aay
(a) a fa aehetar | we ae re AraaRTTlceRs
feera’ anlar ggaet Pare (aq) A usr FE safsagate
aor ae ree, CRI AH Mr Rrevweedt 1 ae o Regn
al over RT aaa |
at grtee iegas ergerpigae Mea sara GET
seat aera areca ren real eat ge: aTeHAASTT sa
sath a apg ge: Pras ger care at: Sek aaa RRTTBAl
aqme Gem: ma: Rae er eeted Area | AT Ca
perdi | aarda Rdnamiretsdeneadiséer: 1 EE |
sree ae | emote trae: eae? AAR AN c 1
wage vein areata age Baha wen mh aresaetat
ra ania: via 1 serait gearate a = peat
sofed at ae toe Aen | Hehe @ 3 ete
tat ates aa 8
a gre me ethers ene sear | ee) seer
AGT... wrote fitter, aeorEt reer, Sanita,



--- Page 93 (OCR) ---
faahaise: | 24

ars —( eae! ) aaeT ATL
fazo—a: cavay aera iam | eHRAPTeRRT: |
Aisa: Fanaa Fgaa FF | (FD
art —( at bed) sehr) @& aa aaa
fagaai—a a alten | aie araaraaetaat
Raw | alte RAM aed ara RAL (A)
aro —( seein wore ater Fer aera )
Steragaran aaah caarerat ee a |
arraene ae Fear trees 0 8
af a)
RrarargagitegreTT FAA BT |
met Paraareaiatatentereftaa: ut
Cm) Rr ak weg ad a ag a ee BAER OT

sanalzeaatar foeeion QA) 1% caqeary | ar FmeT ORT
Bea erltaear Pah tar % safe em BRE egortcersl Geto

Petia at Rea wea a ara: 16 Ree ager Rem ata
armt-( wage |)... SISA, oxaRRea’” eemRatt Sema HAG:
fog | ere, (8. 94)! PR TAGETRIAR eT ErATARA
aamdeaganittgememaAae sitgedteTT 1 aaa:
satwamer eR RARE Ba 1 SL Sisal t stear Beds
ayaa Reepat Ge Get: TAL at Saray staat Rear aE
afte get ond ar PU BREA Reena wy 1 TREAT
ant Stevan: ora een ane aa at tT FR
sar Pet wea erfeCereret: | aay Rok PAR ag eA aR: GT GAT |
aa wr a: reat erereeaaaNS aft 9B sta: eI: 4 geraera-
gested 1 9 weet: ar Regt ere eee TACT 1 C-
don aad aa: WR AINE TET BAA | WR overt ort
sree ns PNA | Tar aT sre: BeaTAT: Ga | Bawa:

1 (get een 1) Sm aera, ( tiger: TERETE ToT ARTE
sft). 2 ene afte eens cea, eat ea ele NA TES SR,
1 exrresreestin soiner (Stren), w AT TR, ASE oy A



--- Page 94 (OCR) ---
at earaeat

(or: afta aratter gitar =)

Bao aG 7 aeMeNaaeat aiftat | aeTeRATT
arrarareaAnergarear warr=ara: | (  )

Seto a oH GH)

(a8 Reda: 1)

Agra: aaer senegseaageaeteat | (7m)

Ge o—( are 1) BS aa aaRTa FRAT TT aaa
wateada aitacag | acaaeiggenrrata year Hera’ ate, (a)

(3% ae)

RTI FT Te | ( Fee g igh grt seLA t)

gao—ae Rear v8 | or 8 eases adi
aifeaha 1 ( S-)

ATT o— (SH) REMTERRRTAAT eae a af BAA)

fago—( cord alia |) ag ont | sRARTISTAT-
gerreraae | (s )

(Cam) Ge o erent ARTE aor 1 ar Rroiaat Reve eae
sextet fitear og orereary 1 (a) af CH SRE | (a1) Ar dors
aia om yar sramag enfwear (a) aft wat serach FAR
aa a8 ator A oer Sea Aaa 1 ar seciGearaee Haar
Bare ara ( &) GAR Rider ag 1 a Reverand’ get Hea
ABs ER (A) BT aeration gt ot sy eves
(a) ot aif 1 ata cat erat omfeofaeltr 1 é
a Gl ltr 3 wachenge | Grardh eae Gig Om eaRUeT
wate phate | fara apr gd a fot acre enemy
oat age AAftsteaa eae 1 GER: eae ata: | gaa
ogee: rae gfe: eR sre: anare | setae: Udon
orga ast ged ae: at al weer | iat we: eM: ATEAARA
mreftea—qneas SaraeFmeT UE: TMTEMTANALETITgAIA |

2 ore=ait TTT, cit shartte
PAT BT, » TER. am GOT (WERT) EL, < HUT, OTE: te Fre
en 1% cot oftgrectiens. 22 A sock He Sie zor Gal woe.



--- Page 95 (OCR) ---
faieisg: | ee

Tae auiteta GReMataT |

o— aie afd ay HaiieasserAr Haney | ()
fago—a} anes aft geait 8 aaaz | (@ )
Alo —( sartereAme |!) RAG aoa aeAe

sianeoriteedt af | (a)

Tat ——geraehs gees | aed |

Berea exter aft area Feraeas

reasearfeaettargiaam frerezaTAtaat |
srahhaitaa aie atcea Tae eat
arang aetiat wewaneategar Giaa’ neu

gdo—ale ad cari (a)

aTo—( Meet) ear aa seat TeRAR TAT
wit ((@)

(a) BG et ae HeRaog eet Meriaro | (e ) Hi aeiee
ft erent tof, 1 (ar,) Fe Ra EWR st ae ear
eat aa 1 ( a) ait at G1 (S) aa Ga ay aug avatar
ea amsiraiie 1

aifeeties gah neorarzag Peniaeaiale od Harlaet ara Raihrealaies
areragreeis war | Yarrdiea_erowarcentrsie Ay |
SAH ois Sion Seeahagett Ww APART 1a we
adeg’ sitarendmarrenia we Bera siete ane: |
ereamRAR gi: an wae over: oa: gt eg OPeaR eT
nme adie safbarrer | agelactrarerearat serra: ¢ qaftcehet Ree
eas Sou: vergin Gat area | aha cea fareder 1 aa: Ge:
seas Brae «ade dean,” eC are: tae: wea Celt geet
ard Preaeaat Pecwearacrar ae Gal gee donegent ge get
Sadr ear BA: BTR THT SYST Bar EERE eA sea:
waPee See ereigaT GEA GRA FT Oa aw gE: aia
Aga) ender: 1 agehebled gan 99 u AE aed Aer |
¢ THR... fey ain. « wat 4 wa eh gi. 4 sr
at gertttin Prasat | +
¢ Brora, ot 7 AS. < ai (Fa
fae cont ise |) et er See Wat
Re, ee Te agOTT afag, a aeet



--- Page 96 (OCR) ---
ae eae

fageat—ai ae ae gatexiisad garni 3g
qeaey SrAMARAA SAA FH: FTA Yada aarssiefaa-
arena 4 Be)
ayo —( ots) aa sivassfORRaise MAS ara
sqaredeies grates 1 TUT |
cava aftat fearemreacat aneqregetiacecite: |
Saag ea HTATSTETATTTT H ATT UR
arto —( RL) BAT APART TPT aal-
was a caedl a We 1H)
geto—afa aiaat errtal aa mated asad (41)
Fagen: widisrsee |) i aa gaeaTTAieA-
agonal asa Tear GF RenraRaTgas Tera gaa 1(4)
za Ryngreleray | sat Ri
after dinerraaragieraa-
eqritcieaearee: afRRreamareT eRe |
Ca) eevee es or Reet FA Ga aan a aoe TET
fa ere ae Rt Rie Boe en eT STRAYS sree BAAR |
(eq) fier aaa ‘mareeer | aoivet ( & fteat aH ereva a (aT) aR
ag wor er een eH oH Hen 4 ( wy) Ht re
Yeewatenieoqenefeeed arg wa moronaerrgaret Ioreltel ameter
srdenea Revel Reremrbeatiaran, | Lee aiPieee Sua
at vest: ores SOR arena | afta SATET ward | Reeve
wen: 3 agit after Ox eegtieeraite: srenegal eer: Bat sr:
agaval: Bands: aay de: Sawbeac Wa: Beer wher get
exact | one TOL 9 ANTS TA
sack ae ottoman 2 ra: 1 ee ror anf enerat eT
con sore Peake a & AAPA 1 AeaIReA wieder
ai: cea Ga | Rigel erent: | aRrererfela 1 aera
emer a 8 Te  KATNA | A Ge MATA TT

oP ages 8am, aR v(m Faded 1), te ot
cor amr ae oe preity sue meee ota, eA,
ve after Door gary. ¢ afl Te, GATE, te SHE He,



--- Page 97 (OCR) ---
fasiaisg: | ae
wargan dard an aferiaanaay teu
at 3
Racgeta fad afetiaaia-
sauata a aureatiendearaaears |
SfaqarRenettareat qarea:
eragaaftondé avsereai adie u teu
Pagaay—( s2e abst west 1) a aaRT oraNTE
ee Ua daatonieraaaeqmea: | aerat
wa ( &)
TU (ade Reve) aR HeNEA—

(a ) Ri aores Set oad arg wer GioergraearadtnegateR a |
artaeg a1
eareaala suze: caren: ofReard aPaBaTNR ara: | cage
are: wea aRRed dakar RA Darang ely oat a
watrdarng OY gt eee BAR aA: BIT: aoa away
2 BHR IE Ta ARCATA BOTT: BT
ae genes: dard a3 eal Gaede: 1 Arefoh gem
“a Bea aaa: Krahn’ a ava 0 93 u Reaetaa
seat 3 Read Marea aRdtere equaled ofteraet a
sanftereat ean afore | seat fers reer Be eae
Preceat Aan orenP eramar ae eR tea: TeaeT FARIA | FE
ea memieat sraiersemrameat Tat gat A aRi(a BIA aeT ea
gre afte fares mri 1 ana aamerageet mem
AMAR: AA nL ae Goulet amTenraead: 1 Aaa gat
a ara Shaerarent emer Ba Merarrad are | gS
eranenfa eeresraieas: Bente a area: | at ara BER ATTY

Tah. 8 A Raa A, yaraMiaTs, 4 afters, Ce
we stad BY Seay ag aT Rey, ce CERT
eagoorgrte, Ae

s



--- Page 98 (OCR) ---
&e wearaeai

ETT
fem StreRTETTS GoUTATT |
a aerecrela aaa
aareratt waar fay Sata wt
gdo—( Soa!) erg er ARI pigwitaaet
gaisdaaat wah sae: | aa gene: ogg |
ag |e Rel | (RL ) BPH ae Bt ea dist a
qraftasid | ( % )
aro—( aaa!) gana sea sesenarral | (Gl)
Beo—( fee!) af sraTis ag FaveeT
aq geqtiag | ( 1)

(am) edt ed 1 genguetieeiterstt a oriad aay
cede fn or ge ret at aa 1 Ag 1 Med rs al se FE
gi omer & eS GA PR (ST) SHR BS A ok
carmel 1 ( at) 8 SMG of Peers | a Fee ORAL

wer 9 wengit: aeig’s ees aM afeega ata que
aqpagranema, Fa Fe ea Faye suf role: era
sae g(a TE AHA cA eel sete GT eI:
EL AH geecreTeNS Te | rae ewe 1 sree ra! eae
Soren: 1 er RST STAR STATE HORTA
‘peat: RoR ara: eT aR aa: RTCA Fy aL at
a eae 1 ageeare: | AEH MURR AR A) sil 1 Sexe
sexarenct at sereeteegrrrst 1g) aeageaeTT: W" EATG
eared egret Ba afer ta Gee en ars: | Tea:
mag ssh aX Aaraaayatea: | sha aafteenta—! erat A
pitoraearraehg ? aA 1a gaged srutatdgen ae
qiase Rema ar: | Ug eT sonar) afar) oa air
rereligat | a OUT TIT erreNgT eT Morera: | ceeATAA

Tam, © See, rere — ate aT af me THEN Ee,
gan tr ct aor on apt aPtPreng (Meg), Eg oer
sen Frat



--- Page 99 (OCR) ---
fadisg: | at

aito—( a9) aggeita Remarreirs |
aaraay afc | ( af Frahteeet |) (a )
geo—( satel o& weet!) a AeA Fe ARE AIR
agg ararneaeireanet aeeamrait | (a)
aine——afa @F Fl (7)
( giver setdarfiget afar |)
Bgo—( séret ey atm) Fy aa sraaad fae
er | Us GB Ben: aeankear Getarral | (7)
(ast cert wet area |)
Gao—( BIE!) sag sag wal 1 ( = )
Aas Bae | gePRRTA |
( gaeeafieaté 1)
UAT BTa sarefeell HAT ATA: |
gdo—( Rum) §: a Bad eraaalt raved ae
wat gourd war Pera: | ager B24 FaeATA | CF)
fago—( avert ewe) ay aaa area’ | aT
weaar mSaqea | TURAL aoa | CB)

(a) Seaee Gy fer erm, (or oat steer |
Ca) og sae ce FE eta GUT sue GNA ARBITER
Recor eraroor 1 Cat) af ged AE 1 Car) AY rer woe
cog Prevrm | gat ae Bary aaa GeraT oTeTAT | ( F ) FHS
rag ast | (=) Ar 9 Sas Bt at FarmemN ae eR grr
ag Romig tat mga Rai eeeRaR 1 (w) A aT aot
gar weer at RAI aR
aUa & reg ety aan « Reaerararcat eeUTT-
aiteades | eb Geter, | GamETRRRAT Te LAAT | HAT GHA
atiasarereat: | Tage ralgred qeife a1 RTARTA

patent vaet aa. area, 4 BATH, v GON SBA
of aan em Laem hes:
dent atiig were. «oF re BH. G i 4,



--- Page 100 (OCR) ---
aR eae

aior—yege: vat | (seat a wher) gain’
sPrerarsadea | Senet eran 2A 3 Bee | Bea ah
Aifteey | ( eolened steele 1)

gio —( sa ater) wd 96 UAT | Fa AE:
mia aifedta | ate amber | ca os A ye: Tae
aarmraaena Races sfereae gitar % React
amnftar | ageat seretai wat | ( % )

ator Gesagent |) eet et |

Ydo—za BI vai 1 (@)

fago—a qgrad Ravea | asta Gaeta
aad aiacara | (7)

gto ae wi at CT)

( si wecimitearaa |)

arto —( usr fy ae gered ated s eereH| ) ar faa
Te) amos apt ag eter caren Mee era
gomrqehior | gt Sa H eeil erste otter ge rk ge Pera ale
fie gar H Peet weve tan gr Hig oi eA ( yet
at at 1 (37) Hoan O& Peeve we A ger GFR a
aia 1 (a) Hr GE aT
Brera ag erecraren PAR wT: 1 a: aie AMA wg: OTR
arracen (HAIG ON Ga KA AI: | UN GN TRH RTA: AAAI RAIA
wat waRare: | gee tas, oT aria’ GANA gelrerasaT SAT
wanfePaar areesar a ea Aare sereiaritia MT-Reae,
area ee renee em eh Ie) A Or UTM TET
oegadiergen | TeaARe |
wererdges |), ¢ aro, ARTE AE
ser. Rt ae, eaularon- fre, 3 onaTfes sero. v_ weal,
air agement age, CoAT ek Beh THT TOT
aera gar, 4 Be Me Te, & (Beale ) ae gia wre, ve
Ser mization eames, wee ORT MeN TIA, a TEE
ior agit war wt aE vigohre vege sgt Hee Be |
cet aor we Tenet wing He wt A wir ME TTS Te
ag (rece). te raving. 1g (a 1) Hoy ve a

TB



--- Page 101 (OCR) ---
Betatse: | aR

at fra | ed Sealers a aaah sarerantt GR |
altaiiariaa aiveartt i (= )
_ Figo—-( arte) aria |
gee Si aga a greea | ada saute
fadia ena: ager aft (a ,
cae aartad waft ad 1
ee: egadtg Frafraenaateae-
aug aT Li E ames |
ihe wena tener ga gue
fara seat saawerAyeTiaATy 0 EF
aro—( fad gianni!) af gem: anes
paassfia: | ( fe we) (aT)
aa
‘aig aur faate arlene gerftat
faraareat cant a eararat!
aaa eat at Watawaed
aq Sfteata qaitact aes un tou
(Car) ea ea Ge Sas aan & Gem aad we
mage ar AAA ger whee (wa a aH: oxeet eer
Hed BA sree a1 gat eee at aw emTAET vk Meo.
faegatt Row | (at) ‘Ate SRA Rremestt ae ae |

arieaaaarad: | aretraatarenas aver | sareatats oe
wraal  eeaneaelg deererarasem Gare: | ee gfe | Tat
sd ome CE Bee HN a BATA geEReRTHaAt eat FATT ay
aan mam gi Pea Aewrer aereinareeraere 1 Fat fee
qe meRTaRRE ET SHY THM fergie anCSRAERT: ea: ea: BAe
gat: Rewer: at MBAR wee Ga gareTTg ag. es TET
iter 1 ets smn aan 1 sega: | ge TRAE

were agaeafea get ge? gt sear og efatata Ve
cae hae 1 “geno wae ewe: | aR ET HN FA
saat irom Selah Sega esa CER TEMA | ACT START AT
Gee vat eee geeare: aerat RERE: oA awl ae gE get

Peete. 2 Ree, FT ep atee, v Fig TOA, eal.
ry HO, nie, ¢ em. § Teves

see LOM. 1 FOMRTTSTOE, OTH He; DATA AR anime.



--- Page 102 (OCR) ---
4g eae

gdo——ae: ARAL weN | TST TELAT ARTE
gare ( % )
UAT — (8H) ATE madt | ( aintat eet adie at
at aaa 1)
fago—at: Ta aS was ay aaran@at |)
UST AI HE |
dite aforeqent: iRareTeT TST |
Baise Saat ATETUTAAT |! €¢ |
gao— aie arg a ag vat eet Ta
aif ad a gat 1 (7)
arto—( FR! ) a gee arena a aia (@)
| 4 ag ge: agian Gita:

(em) sar RHA FH TENT ea aga aR | (I) ATCT
aru ge grt Ft aera (at) aR fH HH
cafeon @ fader BA 1 gArE | (a) se sae ot Ro RARE
Facer & Reernrard ok teat erat | wera TH)
aang Wie. erga Beier GT aA ee, “GeeUhs
eae rede ga SHRFREU CUT grad os ME 1 TE a
caiteroea eeagaea oma: fea: | ora tgerg—errat CH 4
ee ON OTs: TET a ATT walegen: ZARA: OEE ale
exo GB ow RR: ont ARS ea | SrATSOTE M94 It
ey urar araigat a agiat GaRat AAO TIT areal:
ergieairaehaitea abraagetzengerel afew, | a
fags evereeca «eer ee Gm cet AT Gas EG CAT
ae wa ae Pagers 1 oe ware ord Be ARs ga Ot
Frente caer aa: (or ar eafeagatenteen eee
at exquanichgrznrata a ( at ge) ea am, TATE

Tae ar UR aM, HERE RTE, NA
eee OR ae as oN Te ML Sie ET.
eat figs —agieed) weet Gor (gait | ade —aE gy
ae m saree ( Saar ae See Ange SaTRNGTES
Seig terete wre, & Sazefeel, © RTO we. < FANT
athe, 5 at (Te.



--- Page 103 (OCR) ---
faaiaise: | 43

ea Gear BH} aaa | (-F )
(ast watt einer eed ge |)
arto—( #439q 1) gaat PiRartorr AREA (@ )
gto—ale cai anneal Rranaractear PReanraa: | (41)
( Rew’ 1)
cra —( sieisaae |) ager a at 2 TAAATT |
faze] a ara w aL WaT eM Ger aH
arnaqestadiataaale afar | (a)
aa—fg a |
rat wale QaremosARas AT THETA |
werracia Hreat Wa BeATE BART AAT Ut 8
(aa: sree araergar srTAAIeT a1)
qraaqa——et areas ore (aay earl Arg
aRadiar aanifeat | (=)
FaaMer——wll eacaacigenlanea eer Ut | ()
areao—aaiiara any | (8)

(a) career Rat eee (et) Genk IM er
Bert (aT) ae UE aati ot ererRer Crore | (ar) HH ot ST
Foe aT Lay CRT ae STeRT Ra araAAT eMiatiaaTEAe APE | (S)
Gh sero or BR A aa a ess Rear DATA | (
BA Qe Beales eafQenftrer Graf Goa (wy ) at TRAE feet
eee: ia: Ha ere ear erat | eigramren eg gar eTAETAT ET
eat veNRAN | ore TEER | STARR | Hata eves |
cara eh 11 meee ea: RHE RTT: aE: TAT STAT
Beats GL | PGT CATAL | BHAT SHO | aT AT NTA SS
a ga eee ALA a | ae TET:
eee contrary WS one era AE Re GATT ART ACT

Pewee, 8 awit emmate OMe wT y Tee
aq gia, aia wae. amaites, wacvigan
OF a OG TE THT HAT HT IE CoH TE. ART
gre, car tree sree Somers Hanh, < TTR NG BAe HEE
Fea TE.



--- Page 104 (OCR) ---
1
|
| 4g aeauaeat
|

aeato——zeag Hat 1 (F )

ayer ae Baie hr wea |

arse ——ahh aa BAT aT neat aut aT
adit aRaedanat@ | agra sal (& )

araqo——( arg 1) mag waeariga: | CT)

ata (erat) ane SOTRT faker |

(eg: barat wat after et THeTeAAS | )

quate -—ariga a gafiar vata | CT)

TUR AR aniRentaeerentned Pra 99 22r|
aa | aikaita af 9eaT: |

ataqo—-( fet 1) ange geemiaa Re Std Ta
gaa aaarBae | ae ae | (#)

figo—d ah: Ra Ramen: | (ae ee Ter
aft era: sarenwes: FAR!) (|)

(ar aaa Regeagell dais |)
fago—( cant 1) Ry AT gra | qua | aeHAPT
wea 8)

(em) oy Oy IR (er) iB SATA HE HS ae able Aisi
yea afuaresaieet PHRRRART | aT SETS ‘aft’ 1 (ay ) sag STH OT
aan (ar) am Sie gaan Tana | (S ) ses Heard
sre sang wet per Ae as ore Ca) "G A
fae Fv aia ( ay) He ar ge goad Get OS RTA
gaa wauiwer etaerenraaeaTtoe TaeEATATE ATE
moar Patine Ftuared geese eam, | sala Sea |
Seatackanih aagrtian geurareTrgaeParane erigagac-
ged a eH Gee ATA ABET ARATE aig’

raat © set AF TIT SHIR.
altar). 4 1 TEE, ear aera; FA
eee egy Fed eee Ue, © eT GEL ALTE
ec ak came fe ne ae Boe. EY Tear MMe, te A
ar (a a ame gH Re.



--- Page 105 (OCR) ---
fi

fadtaisg: | 4s

BleTAo—( 3% ten Freasarl 1) wif Rares arate
aa Panes aufefaay | ( & )
atato—( Rear) saan searig: | ea
ga: arate | fe Fa ( @ )
BITTO—AG seats Pera | (7)
araqs (wave!) ayiga aaarfefeae | (a)
qo —( ween sat 1) gee FE aA |
fago—( are) A ar Rea | segae are |
(seri araaget 1 ) eal area ara | aneaT Pee gst
Fereaa gftt aa aa ear Bera aaieeaters aes (Se)
as —amre aaeaea eT |
qraqo—( wet iter) omelet uit are aa Aelia
aaiftar amndaaaner Rar | (a)
zis —( So) BA seazaT aga | ea ie ae
ra Nat aaa RAT | ag eeTT |
fago——nalt wed aeag | it amazon Tea Fa1e4-
eafieegl 1 (7)
(ae) Hib Rarer ae Fer Presa, snes (
crak aera 1 ot SO anon 1% Ore (ay ) AA ag CTT
RRA a (wt) aearaet Ba Oe area ( we) a ar PRR | od
avd eae, | ARE A ovomet eaAR | or Mis eer Rava
a gore goer Peraereat ga oneraftoorst deem | (=) ATA
gait a era ae GAIA eNfRHERT aT ereEraHRE FemaM, | (=)
SR oe cr 1 Goma eee He Lea Ue TRIE Rage |
a gare Pita araeat ag aTEAT | Heealatae | Reger
Rene, Raed ewe? eT: | Reais (ead eaten
fed ea rat eR | ERT ETE Ta
1 (se adie) wig 2 ( sat. 1 Cat
aot a |) rere Oe, y= Ra eee, Meet Rene T=
aR 1 Rage ste fees ee. at Bey RAEI, we |e
saa era wet SeUABe, «Remy AEM RL ae Rv BE
preang Frey go, < eet ATA, & NeEOTNTOT ( ATITPR i

ce



--- Page 106 (OCR) ---
ae eae

aero ——( 5904 |) ST SOUT watt HAA)
arto ore |) ait GR aReae: SEL A TATA,
eatgen erat (PHN) wT FF akan
Dermot: SAAT AREAL | TAAOATPARE | (ateaal 1)(q@)
grant ——( sett teat 1) 3 |
eiete ganiteqrrete ia a TET
qitediiea at GARR AAT |
ak garseie ateatt areata oat
faxaRaerg aniaia a 3 Brace u R0 1
areaqen—( art cerenniat)) ange | AFF
dare | aeata at aaa ania | agente 1 (at)

Cam ) aie Greet FH eR oe et (eR) ait
ag Gat 1 or sum GH ORES qurenGiaig | arora aa SATS fratedt
rat geen 1 Hie Te 1 (HT) THT NET
a chetarer afk 1 a aE |

seat | rat eG SHARIA PAA SM
we sreerea wenraean ret: | eae oc 1 wren CE
Sematiats amish: 1 AREA we TeTARTRATATA TE: | 7
arr (0 FR) Tae” eat ee TH” aaa
rameter seaene GOAT, SHAT |
eae fe 1% aie 38e

@ sear aa gt gat ae aa rales
epee ave ast eA He: | wg
ea i at ex eg: argc: AA A AL HT
Pe aa cea aT Head aT (OH ‘Baal afte
Trea eyes aR 1 ONCE | HUA TAL
Sarge (2193 ) wr) Reamedtalawsiddores at eee

Pega eae, wegHRT, 8 ET a AR i, oe
te inc eq Ate ete a a RT,» tT oN, <TR
Cart) meh, to AT Brag HET 1 wees 2 ONT Ty



--- Page 107 (OCR) ---
iadialsg: | ag

( 2% er 1)

Fagaa:—( salmaaa |) a} Rear ada | Rove
aiernraisaeraet | ( & )

wat—fig ge ad oa | arearssisnearia-
yal a sieawaa Sea:
wae ecigas aga ate ct aaa
atest on ean alee are aa fgTT
sraaiosdigd syaat sar freniftct
waa sHeiget eee gee a Te
a2 | Mea saralag wear: |

Re

(at fretrar: @41)

ae adeiget ama facidisg: |

gfe wie cee alte waren |

ee ee
cui grag a1 gee: oe: goeeTeRaraEaT aRaAS LaiNeR

ae v aRiear argat get Amat aera ait aie aragier HS HVA
Seat eae eftem mene Fag a Arey | sre: He aa a
sitgeat ay: 3 RremiRé Rarttiom qa afar He: sediga: @
spa: Roar a Boe | eg BL UT

ale caacidrerat BARISE: 1% 1

2 eR, 9 rerett—ege——we wie AH, —arrer serftianreata
an .nmee tar fe, UTA, ve aa, + Tee Agent
Bar are ar Gre gH TERT SUR. Baers Ae OMT
aarti C4 ser erga, oo Uoreres_ ae TNT:
sere, © ReaeR, < camdinameremeerst fe, 5 a
gat Sie ar sreTRTATETIT, a



--- Page 108 (OCR) ---
adietisE: |

(aa sea He 1)

vate —( 8) sens Fe AT eet
gaat ag: BGA BAAATET 7 AT (a Rear 1) f AOA |
ays sree aT aT A | aR Sie 1
(Soedsadar |) gaitar ay TANT CAME! | aT
agra | (& )

(aa sats a)

apreratet—( Sere!) aig % THIET BY |
atiatarausaeatracasisaa stale aa | (a)

qo ( 19S RHEL) OT IATATS feariaerata
ei daa a Ra (a)

arto eet Hah FH AHA THAT | al Ce
aad a mae (a)
Cag) Seale Salinger ge it een seer 9 at
ont a ar a orotate At at eT BRE
ea | aT HETTL AT eg HTT | TT saat |
(ar) arg 8 sreaera aig | etaedt ae satAueT CaTE
SfahnePereng | (a1) eat Saas  sraawaqe fe St a
ced wai 1 (a) eal meng a CIM TET @ a
cae Prag 1 GR

wa area wate a9 alegre aT MET Mrorer aE fe
war oe marae sraeoraragert wig Perera: HM
edhe 1 TERT ALR RTT saea—" mee
fan ook ite art paramere” A RII
Sash fara dremel Slegned Sreratala arae | a we HAE TET:
iia Panag SARA) cefaraan ait 1 geay aAMne
aiieat: ddanada 1 it orge GeTET Ree oTATETTET

avers, srwok, x attrac. 1 Garret, vee, 4 Rarelt

Coat ew oe ae aor Rake sir, <TH HH
of THR.



--- Page 109 (OCR) ---
aaeisg: | aR

Hz o—ATa eras ATS I Gea TTA (CR)

algo Rd ayy | wa eg aay TageRalaAad
areal PameHER WIHT ATTA AAT: Ba: | (B)

aqo—( ge!) Be Hea: | ( a)

aie o— aay gaa 4 ae aati seal
Barreraraerarar: srry | aera selaretale | (a)

wqo—aa: ganar fH Haq | ( S )

aigo—ed aa aay | wa ag tear Rane
qaranigaa anita Wg aa ee anderen qa H
seidied a Pees aeiRei qeeaeRA saa
aretivaihoh wear sale gare | candies Reena
art ar starrer Laat aratearane aa ae 4g:
aarrat aPioaaife | (a)

(m ), cant "Rig wale a wee A gel Ta (@) OE
iar gg tae ag ag cazenty MRRranerag alongs
erates gierare 4 orerdt gti (a) BH BIR 1 (aT) we
gan a a araiet afiret = FR Romane srasecte ret
a1 REAR we GRETA 1 inate Fe afin, | (=) wee
ae ate oem g Rag AeCongerTaTEe GINO ed om
ae aaserdie & ated & adie Ba Be PePaqeolad evealtst
Uhest ok GAMETETISWRe alder HAT ge erie 1 gH A

Soyr Aaeongae af ore 1 od mete ot a

aie aatiay aseaieie
ards sagt | Feral aver ferarar Be Ravauier 1 eat ee

amet Titer amRequaAieatneem | Rawanda
gore: Rameereecda dacagat | Agee weTAeTtHe | aealseaT

tk toa eRe als
er
oy. SAR ag, < renders, ¢ meat A. te ENTER
(arate) Ror sre et este ene TAT BH

gaan aes fare. e Selwee age ate, age Ste,
igo word. 28 ge sien vite; ey Ste sient Ba iat

mrt eer,
4



--- Page 110 (OCR) ---
aR earreai

ygo—( week!) gene eae Agee a aRAAAAT
aa waa 1 (8)

arato—eet afiart ga aferat | (wt)

aqo—ag werent ag: Gueqard ag AT
4 Preadeqerrarcar Beat aa aera Siaafea 1 ( T)

qato—aeanmearal ar Ast A oe | eT aE
adisereationert agree seBRAaTTOTeATT
fae | aR | od seid wee Agar: | (a)

( aft eer’ 1)
( ae set aera arerrgeiaat oa |)
are —( FR)

(a) ae aoe za aT wel aRemases BA aaa!
(a) i Fi ae oe iat 1 (at) He  weaeradice sit
pacers suitg var Gi FReereS ae eRe graeird Veer
(2) GiRagen ail ot Blt a aS Getiol 1 oat aay Hat SRT
fade oreo otorae THERA, SMASH fag 1 at ofet
oe gerd HAIG ACER |
sree acer rand oftang were aftsraeeer arate oR:
avert 1 arate Ta 1 args HHA ATA |
Frat i Pree 1 eer ReearemigeerT | aT TET eT
ager 1 erat Set Gaia sltaht wea: ar 1 dese
afigiea? came: | Saar aad adie afk awe
ig Sew MN ees: | went eH eT RE
Spat wae res 1g RNA oO! ASH ave: |

7 SRR AeATNTR ee, g Sewes Ae, yea Ne ae aT
cate. AROROTRTENTRM, aT AT a te oT cet eat crai
2 wer nonin, fg GH aU SE. AR, @ NGO TH ge wa
say ze en; ere Freee 1) Bie, wT. 8 aT ee
eat po rere age —H TE SH LATE TTT AH TTR,



--- Page 111 (OCR) ---
aitise: | aR

Set ea earteRe: ert
Teeae a abron ol gureteahe
Soe at aul eat so adit FA
Reaereate aTEqaTATAETTT! FART HT NEU

a feaede |

wend sta edad @ cari Bt
mii fag ai ach Reig’: u 8 uv

( Setewcier 1) A: egraay |

worn: wa aires Rrerenetarrctedt at
sritsenfaa oa Gea efe weet afefeg werm |

ere af 1 eT ae mRHTCRTTOT ART HESrTEHATE arate.
aaa wae Barts TEE | MTR: BRAT eRATENT GET EE Ta
fa: ead: ae a areareaceeTth ae: we: | Teter a Te
sade over a ea FRE agers fl: er
adtag | daergat et: Sa: STS EF BTUAS:
‘i AT | eT SeMET: TR: ate UV at A TERT:
ak gas at oak feat creat zara | aaah aR
arg eer: | srasrerder: | mgeGated gag nan aeeere
adafe—aat acaniGan ia: saveet aga eeu as ero
frends gah raeierent~‘ordert ae AT gle eo’ eA 1 gaa
wer rats a get age are 1 ree are: tae
ud cer gas B aaa: si oh: Aeigh: a: at gaae
at am saa a wa sane: vam a Ma a Gz eT
aay a qurod Pete ser FE g eereaMent eA HIE |
og Weer Srerwmmere teeta easy Beer srieg anigaraTTeEe 1
wages NA Baa gamit ages oat SeATAT aa
ram) “age Lat Seren’ eA ate TOT fet mata Ha se
a aatraaeaet RARE rE RL aco rer: Meaieeiearer: | Bat
sora wate Sear ater ores | arene Far eR eT a:
crea: Beery: a: SAT GRA wT: eR EE
2 omit A. SMF. a aT. v etm 8 Sh ST aT aie
ra ge ape ae aR A RTGS, ©



--- Page 112 (OCR) ---
te were

ed ceait Auctenge deredetat

fag: altar: Siteaeatt Aeeraat Tea UR
(Abed 1) 9 aaisetaaaelararaagheda asati-
titer Beh Asatte avert aaitere |
war fet

far aaentet cuit ffreredife set

gaged aeate werarenfaears |
sts Srrg raze eeaifaet
ar mratorese mTaTARATETAET U8
ahaa aa: a4 Preafa aaa |
(se stat er aero: |)
j | Rezo (ata) dtl Fe atarhsaeat 7
aren: Reena sais sintreredtise aa BaTETRAATTT

ger aerate ace | aerag ear rasa fafa
cont | ( teemacie +1) sais aaa gata Rese
Gates | aa share aba sfanreadia | agua
se wd cage a net nd com oa Rama SE
wore: ae exat ae ort ea eam: pM TATA TRS
aot aor WaT re Ga, AT mat aeTTaTt GA RTT
wei, mea | aa: RI | ROPE RE RU
ved fet gem: at Cat area araeRT we a MAPRATARTE | oR
et ees Sa toe Seem NAT eT: at GET | aa AHL
ian 1 aor snore ran ea ee area Va: aT
some ol hem ser 1 eesreTTRTa at | ae aA eaTaTa |
ats ereard re egret at sh apa 1 ore
data wat saat atig Seg aeraTy ANE deat et wz
ce Bear rtn anger Wet Ft: ies cme: ea rT TRY
mah et 1 Ra Pager aaTAT Te 1 a TAI
Tae teen Rae ve, TET oe Fe,
ceive, odarear, ¢ 3a Ate, ART Ae. © ETT AMA, FEA
ce amat args, «Reeth, to Roar. te Bene at aT
yee mew GAR, te (ATT) THe. 1a TET,



--- Page 113 (OCR) ---
qdiatsg: | gy

vag | (890) sag way Haag: | A aaer Rea
alt aitaratear aia (# )

TT —( PU!) are a BAS Raat: |
fago—( 4441) Foor aaa Dera | (@)
TAT —( 898!) gaea aalanla aRcaa Para: |
Fago—( Hea! ) Tea HRCA aeTe Saefta
qevagaaaseraen: | (7)

Tat ( FET!) Fag Rae fe a dae aaa I
emg | Arata: AgMea |
fagrn—( #1) ate 1 (7)
crot—( Fe) ay aa ag 1 ee aR
( aft eearenetia at are 1)

Fagen: —( sé arr orn ied) ay HaTAR

Ny > ee bd
gMazeatsceeaeaa aeeh aver leeatt 1) (=)

(a) 8 Het DacinareRony 9 ciel Maracas aaa
ont siieat ar Fa wana Raat ahs wee aA
a1 ou gs RorasreTen TEESE wT eT MorasEaT Ke Sra et
exe) 1 a awe A oT MARMARA 1 a BHUCAAH
weugg Pee ea FRA aye eae FAIRE |
(a) a ae aot Be Bee suieRARE | (a7 ) A ler a wee
wea 2 oaefaRageraRated of seed (a) wader (S) A
wei la gagenszeratemged oe ae age gageNr |
Geet oe aRRR eae aan, eH EG a aT ea aR RT
rads TasalaATER AerederoaeraRARead egal
areas whats, | Renate said ema, gue
adier: careeaie amRerannqdsznea iS: eat) stefea:
"2 oar BMMPCeraT. § ATT A ay (ear de. y od Saal. ¥ OT
oe © Rwmedor or mga oe. oat, st,
8M coe fer Fe A a aye 1 ( SORT) amg IE HE
waiigathay ware, v Reems. corey | rer Rarearet % 340
Rong EA. < are vat Aros NOEs sHITSt eH Ay THN

te gate orarrecnattedteereralt sear ag HE,


--- Page 114 (OCR) ---
Re } area

aga —( ER aber res) gal ania |
raat araanatiiene a |
fagadi——-( FOr 1) as Raves Barer | cs ay ay.
witese: seqayanata Bala raeaAqEe
amare: | & )
ator —( Rae weit) ga BeagrelRam | Tafa
me: | war f& 1
pare Seren: wane garenfaatd Rega
Be: seg ait gates raft eqeateeanferare: |
deratreaancaiteteaeme ts
rperareuaiseatarenna vadiae fraarr 04 0
Ral

(Ca) ar tae te 1 gd ae oN aMeeTe deiagiton-
aba fier eather rye word eee |
see armies Ga: Rar Se | earsaegINg Sa: | el ee:
Safi—oy crater amet whitey | ck aeRt oT
weaker afeas ceae HES Cae | Tea Fa alt
aiid yea eT den UT, TAT TE: Re: HEAT AT
argrers arreceaibedeien: ey 1 eat: Reremeiieiet a
era oe | weet cera: ET eT w UREA: GL: | eae.
cam | Te | GH GH TTT VERT: arated
apa ana: sat Ba didorans Romer gee ST: STR RT
cars Se: 1 anata eae ae ae eae: Raa safe
a saeatren tare: Om: ees als oveaahal orearas ora Ora: wt
dorar raat Regen: Aisne a eafkewrat aoe Ua gO
eager weed arate Rarer: oa: area emaETHRVeTal Gi: FETT
Reasares Rarwner Tiafeafae ha: ale eat BATEAT |
7 ( fear) wa, a arg aT, v Ree oF Te wh ot
Romeredi-ng ono, Rape Tie, «OAT —AT es,
co eto, Rye Re eee; obfiee. ¢ aTeofie. ro Hforore; MRE

a



--- Page 115 (OCR) ---
i

qaiaisg: | ge

aratsite aetatt eat Hae
‘gat Raa watt afearaeiar |
searearaatadia atraleort:
aalseamecnfatizne: Hen 0 &
age | arefieanosd wear Baaanimarret Hees: |
fagan:——at: dea afhray | (eaitiio: 1) (a )
fagaa:—( Rae |) A ame Heres Beret OT BY
agdgaherrTteta, seaaragacarerenteTE
ah: saat Ral searqaiRaitedara: | (we)
(Cam ) ar Sika afk 1 Ca) at aores Roe Deer ga
Pea Recorded Fema acaTUTA TH
Red carqerdt Rieder |

aT ATL NW eT 1B ssa Ge aaa sea

adits water 1 qa wa aaa: Raa: ome Be: eT SRETIRAT
amin: aa er: Ba: CAR eR 1 AAT AAT A Rreeehat
sata geae—gat | sHwaaaRateaie ahh: | aa nde siete
faaraftaea racer 31 ge seme oT RES ST
aed Ren ae: Reem aeT Tad: | Ga eet eeifahed
aren fre: erdioeser: 2 (Aes eran PAU: CRT ATL
gah WA ie Hea WO a: 1S ogee anlar Farr
warmer | eteRiomr: aihierat: meraat Reardiearet wa 1
aR sebent saat-& wmAaA SHY eget ara aaa wa AAA

wre: ( gat wad dd cieaal atarrer sitter aren reeat | eft
as Sy ory: Gk WME: ARE sienkoRaM at STEREAT
Faeaes aR aetelRonh vere aula: 1 ME aaa Rare wT
re ioc 1 erator 1H § I Seantarest Bert

a ee
opie. § at Steet anit, v Teaorneg...erHeE. cen
Streit gePeahte ( serch ari» ).



--- Page 116 (OCR) ---
a arg cog at RA
gu gaiaa earatet aaisearair feat
‘aremrrara area aint reer \ |
ate: aed a7g YrTeTATAS
aavderatet BUA ECHOSAITET | 8
ater aie |
fago—arag Basa: | (#)
( afteraat 1)
fago—( ea) Areaner waeay are HAHA
ifs RoctigerseR Me AaRERIAIL | TTA

aa ( &)
{serena 1)

Ear
didid athena Hracaaaet ic eae
aren diet aad agelaetiat qrawrafgeeet | |

Os Dabok :
eqareerewrtt Robern (Ret ACTON! a
axetil |
agra e Gracaaaeretenres ane gut at: a
Be eae econ: WEI HE eg

aie aatvens | geal gers | oa
Smerpearedt got gent RATA, ARTHAS, ATA SNF

rath 1 nee ree ie rented: Sa: BET GAT cate
Fee deat araeat od ameeareed 0 Fagen ETT
eae ee nw 0 ae rere Th AGHAST
wait gant atet 1 Rede: SEE

fuer arama | AA gaat aA

qa wet

wait

facgare: Piediae a
rt ee STITCH
fant. 4 et orreteoree. 9 Fore,
caer | oe, Cae. te AE TTT .

te Bey, 28 HY MEATS (LOTT!)


--- Page 117 (OCR) ---
qeitisy: | ts

orrerrererra ae fare Gare: argc
afta Gar sane Gamacniigdiias RR <
(08 after: 1)
fago—ii ed ae Pocernagat qyutieaeeaaeat
ApIRaaiteagergaATAAAAT aa are
warmed donate: | aes Rag mara aaae Bas aRol
aritei qéiea eames | ( & )
qatar 8a 8 vlat eaters |
Pag o— Ais rer | ea nist | (eA ReH:1) (eq)
Taree aaateARaragaae arn:
aeaard area | (eer ahr!) adr ISA
wafer egtoheamiateatat saahad sie vera: |
amt
(a aad ag Mikeanengist gantren@ccalee aieeneere-
sAreafrauerrwenineet a er areteamoed doers tat
ea Rad a ona og RARER Toil Fer we TAT |
(et) ata ace | ge BIE

snaf@: gar azarat aadtat wale aRagaid ovata Bad Game
at ae crtmee Ba Mage: Reewa: ht ON APE: 1 gt Afar FT:
sere er FAA: RFR MT Aes BRE aT: fe
aan ar St wale | wee A Net Meera: Ay aI
aaa: aRtwaiae: wea arar: | gevleat ee: | <a RETA
ae aM at: OA Ron: at Bl Ramey: TERA gel Bae
cra eters | “genitens aI eT L a: OVE
daenirgwer GR ave: 134 Gay 1 Ret aes eA
Raeeato | ware: $name: fe fe see: |
aa sitter a ST ea Pio: BA wie: 1 ee
ear a oh ean ea aT a: aN eA | TR |
7 tages AVE, UE, v PON, Mead Glowoe,
apogee otaRaTay. © A BH one me aN



--- Page 118 (OCR) ---
wo waaeat

soraaargt aft ae eave at aniGer
waqit at wosret Tara Tataet |
agit agent reared saxergatscret
cmafeact Saeat sant fe ane 8

ad ad Ae aeae: | Safe 7 ag AR: eR
gard 34 |
( a afer arareen ears 1)

aqrato— at araai® wes aa A Ge AMAA
ssdgaafiareatt 1 C% )

aera o— enna AiR FAS | ee a Prefer

i Rady aaras ca 8 seraReTa aaa | Cw)
araago—aa ( aaa negra: | (1)
paao— arg ae (a)
(38 atte 1)

(ee) remade of Ser aa a ogee erat saat aft
Brea 1 (aa) ae somata HAA 1 eat Penen-
gait BA sercet So B ows sea (7) aU of Be
meee 1 (8) 0%] HM

cafe a are | Ta: erento eR areg, 1 srorfeeTe-
Fae 1 8a acer AoA Soe swt raat euaRT |
aie FAR at HAY At sear HEAR aT ET TAT ste: wt EET
abt several seit Sen Ferct sera eB ot qh Perak a aC
ahs | anova anfereated carseat ett si ed a weal | eR
ed angen: | aa TT TTAT OT TTA BT Aa
gon qaePRag Gea i eT | eraRRaet A ara
ened | it TT Sa THOeTCEMe alata TE 1g
mS Wg aA RN see Te se PNT

eater Pee | RAT UETETA TY oT
sn ar, § Rae, « ae, ETT.



--- Page 119 (OCR) ---
|
|

aaiaise: | wt

Cet at dere eae)
qarde—( el ve) gat Rermaaie vaTes:
aaa wat ahareierat anita | ( & )
seats gi ar Raeniar | aeragaraaet
Hat BAR | (a Bt eA!) (aw)

Fago—( cetera ffvem') givit gy ey aaa
auerameray Wa: | sea amar gt | Ca)

aplerto—{ meet ees) aeaaT (TD

fago—( eH sere) gar eRAA BH AGAR (=
art o—( tragareanran, |) ai gait |  )

Rgo—( Steet wah) was TARE ayes
(aa Reger seeaereAaToAe |) ( B ) :

aerate —( rary aigest Sera) gatat eaREARR
anrat TART | (HY

fago—erai cazai aunitat | ga ae wea sazae
HAR TTeETA: | ( esi |) (a)

(a) aa Rreeongai txad giterhe cat a8 org er
ee (aq) fe ot a Pere | at sia MareTER Hd AT
(Ca) gait gg ra fod gy Ca OeaTeTT BE ote rere
afi 1 (a) deel 1 (ae) Hage wr a coset

ay) wt Belg 1 (wie aretieg EA eres 1 ( st) Ear

Faeafe we sree woromt (BL) Gey aH Movtor | gal
attr sera at tiered Zi ae
paaper: Saraped Garied Fa a a | ay gTRAQMATAATEH TT
amRaaimaitenat aiqrettuatranaaremectae wet.
ama adaedl aedamar | aa eread eT a TOUR Ht

aaa: wees « ea. x wera, eH,
to, 4 a aera, ieee (sare). < BA. 5 CTT, te HEE
Be ty eretrorate ede (seamed ) 1 ar afte 1 (9 ee
(eit 1). eed Rh oe. eR, tA Te 8 SRT

sacred

(ae arora) Tork Forerramr oN | BEeeH ere SINE
Bad (arent) Die Heo Reentt 8 MORN cere TE,



--- Page 120 (OCR) ---
wR erat

ror — FR sotratiaraiemrent Piaaratgatae
1aaat
aio: emcee a eat arat Taree |
ante sat Racrreauisrertat faa: ufo 0
Fago—( 84 aoa) wala aIaie Ea Be Raraerea.
Retreat aera’ Laas aaeHTAT |
rere —(‘Weestat earl)
fago——( ernie 1) Fp amet Rem aa | ca as
Rartiar aner | ( @)
RAI —( 8G aed) aT aah rat |
fagaei—aF | CT)
i —( are!) RR ATT
rf & aa eat carga wt
emda saragTS aE FOUSTTA |
eargreateelg PaIgATo RT AT
Aga eaaagerarageoaene frat 8h

(me) AiR wee cat G Ramereat ga se sfR"Ger awer-
eA 1 ar ARE gure () A wore GoMTaRTE |

f

fix
eat ag ag atten arerften | (at)
alta: orga: Braver: ea ater afer | ta: wate: creer dare:
mrmeat aie: endl ered sit gear erat ar en Brereat
at | a era AM aa srvaiarren: Tee: ofits a
RAR are, a, ave: Reva Reet aa 1 ey sTEsREERRAae
coat | coraTéaTe | ora ude SEMEN seer wae Rea
a Ser aera aT Sat |S TAY SgaRTEATTTET?
ene nce “ea era” a ee Taw
aes ce mere AT TO, | HA TARE 1
strate ht i aa adalat: fear sa: aaRICRTTRTE
7 rSTERTITG |) ave, 3 STS, FAST. Y TTI,
eae, & HT AT BRT STITT. wart. ¢ aIH,, 9
cage, te arewod. te rarer. (x SoaEL. 18 ory! (BERT:
care |) cer reg aria,



--- Page 121 (OCR) ---
aitaisg: | we

qaqo—( wren |) aga caat aaa
Ga: GRA arqreeadtea’t start | (-# )

aerego—( sear |) a cd Raa 1 i ga: areart
geuni a areas | (aw)

Pgqen:——waft wMRS Rae yer ReasaeTATET |
ent aaa Reaeera Rea areata geass: wePRy
AA aint geag a7 ageraaeaa: | (7)

qpaqo——( svar) atalkiag |) areas seRt
wuftot | sadawats ga: Baae 1 (a)

(a) saan’ Raa amd git Ri
anit arated 1 (wa) ARM Ge aL oe TeReH
demir 1 (at) HR we diner war Remeet eraie |
oro ara & Memeare Are TraaaeNy gers age Seng eat

aaah oc Aerotech (mr) eames ong ER egw
seraeraat 38 Pelee

aedtert: | ci dowaderagiened atitan Ae via dea’ 1
aa cdl aaa anit gaed  D cuaaTE CA aTATTD | Seg
war sag ataget TATA: wee: AH CHAE sraRaaRRerrT:
geoparoe: Ba Ret gra | ag aoe RE soar eH ae tage age
Ba weal qurdieat 1A aa cngreeUlteiie snerET
eran aah rer meaTeRNRAT 1 URE A tae Rees 1
madera Riar ag aemeRcag war wer sTiBeT ARTA: eRe
ae aeATA Megat Rah He er Feist gee | SERA
cared vegeta am 99:1 se (So) FRA? ea
<q acaeata Roane? Gaeta Dal we are RRA TTeRREET
aga SIRT EATER od OI aad | ae
arbre af arate: 1“ oitaeaatewar wAR * eR aR | aTERH afer

196h wot HA rare. fA wir ICRC Me TRTUNTTAS ae
fron aurting wea. te (EU) AEC. 8 NRG,


--- Page 122 (OCR) ---
we earaeat

grate —( bend |) grat eaten | CF )
fago— fader |) hae Bere Berea es By H-
mieten: atet sarTAgea HMARPTATT| @
rat ak 7
ara defeat agTTTET if
Seadtdtac: fam: geeanfererara uv
aft a | aantAigeaa salerers | Fa |
fis caren bet a eer aaaied Fea a
gfe ax eeierren Gee STRATA FH |
peat aa erat aqTe Tales
ris caret SRE ace fara ER
Fara wate 0 ame (  ) aes BR GT
sed goed ares 3a wed Mera

see a ents TITS:
gitar gar aah eat aT: AT
aveetter | oa et eae Rated BTPPE aie qe 8 aa
qocoiaetes: Paras: Hs TalereCTER wekat: od 60 Fer
we: fet aT | TTR: saga aesearadrerTTet
Spear genera: 0 het (RH era: aera ATET: | WATE:
aaa 1 1 0 ae wre MarR LTT freer fe
gee aT 1 el aa HG TATA: HT ea ara rafea reals
Rata aig: 1 rg seNAeT WRaaterarard a Rae GEE POL!
caf RAR HU AL eT aT OTT HATEN eT ait a Ua oTae
ara 1: a: Be TET S RTA: HA: ag Tae Te
a BUR Pam 1 aR g GRIST | ae ORTERTECNT drat: severe
saoat a eae aaa regu 1 or: ETS ATE 1 Oe
aragea HeISTATAAAT TS wend WG FAR
Paerdigear wae, «OR wee. uae SERN
genie, Gatlin, (Ea Me. aes Heels Te
Warr, ore. © sega soe. =H aed wee NTE,
Vetere (men) ed ey aT OL Se AE
contract, 8-382,



--- Page 123 (OCR) ---
alttsy: | 64
tera o—( ieeagesameta) aera HeaaTe ATA

ai gr: aeiftaireeaa: ate arta Bea ( HD
ars —( Heevavard | ) ea Beh area | IE FA

Fago—( alent) at aed Rage | ores SR
aaa ora wt: | Cw)

ara —( siftere agi 1) FR area sea, AE |

area o—{ ahaa cath sarakght Rarer |) aT
Bao | seamartiaraacif | (a)

fazo—( arama!) Rare aie |
aaa, | (FR!) aS HEIQAAT eZ AH,
araaistes: Raat | (a)

qiaqo—ard aaeaH AY TANT Re
Raenrsse | ( = )

(ae) roe ae corr aren qian slasher wet
cpa arent Bra (ep) St aster fet 1 sare terest
ard) (a (a0) rman aT ce Ae ciety Te SATE |
(ar) 6 at gen Red ag 1 | A HTT TAL
a asin ce QW raed ortrenee (a wee o wae
oh ek eg a OR ARAL |
ean | orgie Gis career wre a TA: TAR oi
_ eat Re Rs anne: aaa | ore: evalsame |
aftr afteriionraes fceneamreeaaen sient | eee
gem, R Note aA aM: Rion: at aan

cavern eri, er eT: GEHAL EAT: TU TT
aggat 1 ser ed srahé oerueomy 1 see eS ATRL ET

pee eGR (ta SearerTt )—( fater TINEA ae aE
wage MANER) SH A Tee 1 TeeT ee, TT AE TER |
apd. gore. v megenEe Ramet,» smayes, Sf AA
araiRorette, § cara rE TT ee Te, eos A aa
ce oneares...ctamd $f (SH: ST ). i pes


--- Page 124 (OCR) ---
wo IFA .

ait —2R bi seaercecacte: 1 aA | eT
aren | ( sree: wae 1)
oraraararaane ea oe
wrarget acordtera 82 ut |

artqrattrat J GeTR ,
wed att af oe eo Af SATE N 78 U

arate —( 28 weed 1) andy siete | Res: |
we arta sagrted | gem ge gral | |
erage: | aoa | (KR AraROR) (-m )
fo ais HE aA | eH MAAR ARTES:
at Seat sar gaara wae | ( @ )
Po — AAS HSA FAST AAS TAMIA
arog | date | new 1 (7)

aati | (enn eg: wR)

(a) saat BR Sec Foote eg at rah iy revere ERE
Rearet stor gar A Beate 1 dh as Peg, worst | afted Sar!
(eu) ae et aera wet oa ER TONE ETE RA TE
qoarattn ercoany | ( a7) SA erie GA ger HERE ATRIA
ar Brey | aT fee | TSH

waitin ofa: sg FOR
ager again gamreraeteeate Tat oa facdehia sre
aia 1 reaemraeraatransid aif ae: 1 gaegwee TAA.
Reed eemeoess a rT GH BUTT TER: Be Txt TET aa
cg eat ae ene Se eT Ree aA, aE
SR oem gis vers aver aiPsat C7 se rae | ot A

Tene mani hee, 8 Reo See, Re lee
(sere) stg ore, = ome. 2a RRR. YE TTA,
ag eg Saree TT,



--- Page 125 (OCR) ---
aatitsg: | we

fago—it afte | rat Bt | weap
ata (#)
qa —( geatves eB) Rana sar nal Bi |
fago—ai a eat sala agencaaaadiay fawia: | (@)
on—fre PS fied aeeai’ 1 ay eeEA CITT.
aaaisenrs werra’: | gat |
arent fife: soragurarea tet
adie dtetd RaBaTa we AAT!
far gaara cgencem sifranst
agaea foo: vafeaataae f@ wate,
Fagot cer 34 fH ae a ara
gayest siteadifa ata | (1)
stars ened eae | a
(aa: Reet ereaeriiveaet amie 1) ~ 5
ite——( 224!) Rea eta Acadia

Cae) a ane gr RA a He OMENS HPA) BE
or fay cardt ot arat FH raweater Rave 1 (at) aT RH
afteate feo srontt | areal! on gat siPaeateret wei)

aslecaarata a: | ganéfed abt arte 1 GATESA | TTT

| Rene agmarganemaht de: soreat aad aot se: te GE a
| sal + sagging whe omdaadtsntreaa wat Te
tee og era oranda Tee sit Gene SiS
gaa went | aenengees Fer ATT fal wale fasta
somfnd dgaest wit | saa Migendawisieacadl-
sient 1 Rate ae NT a TaN a” eeakGar | eI

fO6 GA: Gem ined abaiin ? HARA SB RENE §, ae
goede ware weg ae RT oR

| Tamers. © saves, wt afte, x ctiee:, oleg,
aR

vara eT CTS oe, wf om, a ga

iy
29)



--- Page 126 (OCR) ---
we eaeit

farmer Reames Bah faite | aRartt
apfteantis | ( tre raat) (& )

fago—ai: fe ye a Rate (Braet scien (& )

ist—ag aha Praa | ae Adan WAR
avanti sean | aR | G24 Tea: |

( a Sierra: 1)

arafter—( fae!) after qa ARATE ANTAT
a gratadagaraar Gar aft yeTe | amaqenaenrat
meat aararfed fear | (7)
(sired) fag ara Re AL | sae: Bae |

adtavaararat GRR Beara HA | CF)
Heer sarqaat By Att { aaeaalt ere |

ear |
fags: —avaraanraie 1 Cat are) Cs)

(am) etait ond ftir eexatae Get Parenter Fw
ped he wea | et eel witeeL | CT) He HS aT
ier Perr PERK Gee aRRoTe CT). RE eT et ST sea
ergot akan ot ae Retr RANG RAR oT TH oe
ecard ager arene team ( w) FE eA A 1 ee
geen «Ron en acer ge RAY erTeT wi(e)e
aad era |
ger aR 1 eT TR eT geTSAA RAT
emorneren Tarehe Rarer sei: GPT | eR: ale
gay aa | area Ger | era: GBoer TaaeeTAeTRM ot Ge”
aipegrtederer Tea aa a age ersten | eres

pe ee en
Peer, 6 Ret (ire De ontbetor ai een ge aT
say ea Meo ee, < THE TT TET TUR.
gece afte Rare aera (Ret afte, ffgrtens eet OF
eae etter Gren. 0 re tinge Te FURST TETe, .
Be, UE ah ay RUT, 22 TH. HART



--- Page 127 (OCR) ---
gatttisg: | wg

‘arnt 2281) aerate Aredia: et
Peeaeianes anaragzed carrey | (ee eater
wa) gt att at oa Ravineraensae AI Fee
waft | ( 28 @& wararamiat 1) ( m )

Fagass—( Rett) ar gate | aed BA aTERAAT |
( seerg% 1) 3} aay site oars | ear ae Bat
aaaatigeren aaa’ | ( @ )

TT segs |) er at |

gra—area 1 (at)

aa —( sae sera )
faenad fas |

FA HUSA: ATOM: TTT USNS AA |
ae: fark aaetist eqeqat ated Ha

aurea —( dort eg 1 ) api | gata 3
set) geReail Sea gael & sfiftantien: ge: | 784

(a) a oa cay migdioary Ge Rega eter seal ee
fear ener 1 er re RE OTR GeT RU ore sine sre ae
wept 1 (a) wt go mer 1 ERA race | A aereT_ Ree
cote at wes ah ere weaAtar aera aTaTRRR (HT)
wilitonshe aaaftwn a8 oat Sarata weenie: | area ae:
sa aT: a ara AR aT AT: aT TANT | AGE
Ft | mee ate TN sige sede | aga
cori | oid aeaegerr? ef8 org sxenewat: (a wdererindteel GH |
waka RGR ares stoma casera A AA: a a ESTA
ea a ss es ara HT: | aoe Cea: 1 a I
ey sae eae fs Be: eeTeaAR ak eriaeaeae: |
« grb ered ef are we 4g W or RL
ee ee en

oats weit, § arama, «of eare..omreh eter | ( 608 Fah FAA,
TANG 1 I TST AE TROT Fe, cag SH TH,

a FRET



--- Page 128 (OCR) ---
<< wareal

Bret waral year gata ARR aie (FRI) FG
gag ar at | end: werd wa: a gaitemnaat g
SUR | (A ga: ore aPC) ( H)
art bE aekaresae,) get Beat F arafter |
( wodleareanfear 1)
4 STeRCAAATT ATENATTAT
afta fea a carer |
wiedatt fag sifad Sitea
quite aa aod argarel frais u you
(ai igaitgcr o& gat el sea!) GREAT FR |
wa Pd qeareraRd year ae Bt
)
;  aeeteereh
Bae aaa ace afer aw wr wife aRaeee |
BRS GE A ART | TTRIOH oe rat a ot a ER raat wg WAAR A
(ee) Hc Hog A ororreaora afin ot errant BA TACT |

Sienreneh shRarsarer 1 were eearae: | erat eh re Fed
SeRRTaaNeT | STOTT | ah GMA orga B oatsat eAFaAATAT
aia arent aaa car anges seme | cdecatemed sat
am ge Read: | aad sarod aft ge 1B ahaa siecle erat
ad ep aaegan ia 1 aren 1 MY sawyer
ed ga argadl og er rae BUR | RonfeE ARM FET AI
wet amend ateiweveatiatenneiere: 1 safe ae | AAA
gee wife afta: * aie aes Uae a aA oA eat aT
staat 1 aafbaronar wake: 1 sei’ arava sverearerad | ga

2S Feit SUM, sea, 2 FET fe ater ger
RL emer she emma. y RR. 4 Cem «RE
w RRR, ¢ sTgareT mes pore TateeTRT ee aR
4 eset 1G Setar ao weg Fe ORM CHT!) TTT
wa 1 gh ee, to aremrect— gh Ue ar srt serail
ate (EyeT), 2 HATHA are smear sre oT THAR, TT
BH orarhra—sromrer mT oreeaAg—oromraT oT BieeATe,

a


--- Page 129 (OCR) ---
atiisg: | “A

(x stat wenger srecet 1)
ato army 3 7a seaincanragart
Selneorar waaige aq | aRarit aata aerdgs-
agra | )
RTO ASA BY AA wl saa | aE a
a 2a gaat wag a Gat aay ABA ( @)
(afta: 1)
qaT—-sit a Arent eredar ah Avera
Pram’
igo—( el ea1)) aR ga ae aay AAR Hat
aay aa ahah eagle cares | (
arago—( set!) Aa waIsaa geal TAT
sraraeant | ( @ )
goals eum Pret year Blas

(&) Bi samen & og Renita aered cet eters
eft gk Feet a ef Hot Gog uger orate ergeMERH, |
(9) B owe BA ePhrer Cok NE soni A ae aD HH BA ga ey
go RA 1 rg wy RAL aT) ABA AT UT ATA a HAR
a oSR gi A MIs eat Cos oa 1 (|) BIR Haat
wa GR age BS Hier vag | (Ss) A aati’ Meat
waft Reraored ere 1
eave: | Bai eaRreat Rom Hergaeta Gases gee eT eT
phat ag ef Ro eet maT om eC CR aeaREZAT-
PHA ar | aeeTTT sqaat 1 araiterar wranszannarita-
ati ATE A RETA | TAY Beare: | STA
eee eae era ee ea ETNERET GATE: |

2 maT, & ET. 4 AE oy AE AO WIRE Som STR. A
afte ney ext arnt reaetic mfahigt SY RE Free. ¥ URde CRT
pea 6 Red AR, Hi oda AR.» Sor co HT

Stee com Seu ores et aa
niger, t0 og ie. et oreo ( srs), a,



--- Page 130 (OCR) ---
cad erat

ara o—( diet afiaret) aera’ et ata
warmer) ereieaht aya | vege | (aI TR) (aR)

abTo—ak: aaa AeA aera
Fear sreRTARITAA BUA | (TY
Tet — sie Rema wea 1 FA: |

ararentialt eferd Sagi ata ft are
aqasea h pfeeeregh St art wa ere

ved we Gearireyafter Sie Fear
ofaraiueteee ee an at a te 0

are o (wedi eam) aa 1 Fa RETATLCT)

ero -araier ar a aati’ aa TST
(a) aH % UG sfoweiraa sions aT

creates af (a1) rare aM Ue ORE TRALN
Bare aftr avai arleree eeraraenetera| arnouRATATY
a eet 8 Oita zat |
fears aad Rear geal Meanie aedtaa, srr
SAGAS a A: ¢ aa Bd alah —areiteRFeaANg | aren Bau:
Baa: yd aierewagh aaa waeRa 1 stoengesy a see 1
ait earcieeath af& ae we satire: 4 rear ait ataaniea-
mantel aa eA idiot G4 ater sen ga eeeizs weet
git aftaraRaat att peaaara wrataalt ausaie Ra? fa Pea: |
Bree was aT: | Aa AMT A KEIR GeaT TA: TA Te
Aa Te Bae aaa SH TT FATT
Ba wed atealts ter: Sardaala
Rafter seal tar afte cat qeat aT

Taft a a eT ae Tf
arestraastas afters sigea eat A eTpORTRATEAUT
arg eng 3 Fe ek rec reer ater et [a] TE

Gavantirangaieead ret ner. Vere. VF. eT
pee moe: Sa TE TET. | MOTT. SOBA. < TVET ST.
ewe erate ME Cee ey FUER A MT ETE | TR TT, te TTT
fae om, otro AA Ror Be PT seat arTe
fe ate, :


--- Page 131 (OCR) ---
|
|
|

aaiaise: | a

(eg ster) 38 3 were aigaiesgaela |
aed meat Agqizesesesar Taf|NPTal: | TeTFATT |
(af cre: Gait 1)

aredo—( te!) ariga SRR | PRN
aesifiararan: Baa gamgquae | ( % )

rat —( era) RRA ae Bea | wat BA
sralaai 9% Preveiigare eae 1 (srttaafeee 1)

fago—aald ai Peqaearenr canigaetla Aanewa-
aRaT Ha Raartisate: [aR ara aA ABET
waraiare, | (4% eared ata 1) (@)

ataqo—( sai) giaAMTs caat aA aat
aia araory | wat a grat araTAA: |e

arensto agen | ( BAT REE
sagarrarenat THIET HHA | AOL AAT
(a) aatan Set Di ofa casita Gait

aaa | (er) AR a eaten rest aera NeTACR-
Sie erat pm HET, Me ere aoa ar Veet

gic cea daatvent: | atoed aera steg BoreaT | faraset
fee «eer are em WAAL STANTS TRA « ARO TAT
aaah: 1 QC frat 1 gE ware: (se “mrelo~( ve)
mgs gotten” eae nee “CTA EMTETANTS FE PM TET
Georerear araiteraarraneaeraa arate Res at
1 (ard aired aon) (RAE eg (), Say ea ae
seared Rf FerAl soe (spre ) ede, Boa
oat: | reer ATH ae, Ue ogre Feta. ven aor
Zara, exfegnrer ary, «Aigo ( erg aes 1). SIE
er area, Re, <r STMT
« Reranti, to ar R n Reeare RE eS
omens, so Zee, 14 AH THOT HA | HA
Caoontee aig A sore, ty sermret—arms: ee OEY
mregtrnr area, if hare



--- Page 132 (OCR) ---
8 wae

BUTo—( FH) ar Reg ReTRAgoNAT AAT AgACATTAA
Raa a TEL | & )
fago—( afeerd ciswadien |) a aay wR ARATE
dar arangvearg | ( @ )
( sister Momear areeeen |)
at —( ee As eT |
fr gear rol gee Segoe ara

fae asdarat aatt
* na rafae faaar ra rete
Laer eee mae glee ute
aftaharhitg Raat | Mi Heratgararadtia sank |
(a Renan: 1)
wa Saat aT aatasE: |

a

ed afbagarg aq ag wend Gore a REI
BRE sro Vl wa Re

qlee SURaEr | eeagorar gviateT Pana
waar aitainers © a” ef eaETeIgT: 1 ory arTageT:
sarnferen safe ara aah At iLecaest@ cen &
ceoreren. FH Gee ef teu Teagan: maT Ba:
niger raha Ra ed Uae Fee ed
a Fe ear ciara Fefrea: | eet ar ay erect Agar ez?
wearemnegat deat astaral sect: seat at araitet Pee
fe fat ag ata aad wer at At aerme Prt 1 ae
BA FSR | al a BE alae ware sat eer fer ae
sh era HR Perec a st WH 1 ane TAAL NASI
afeentareren Treaniy 1 ore Ratsererae relies AURA
aitaigararas fa wera |
aft cearacidisiat gets: U1 a UL

oe ee ed
oF ope (afte) Aare. Cat ana
ait), we CAME amet were Ge we
raat 8e Reprem, con awe eY Rewem, Loti we. ve Me,
sage, dae, HAAR, ¢ AT, oH, wT Re OH
SBE, te Riis TE, 1r RATERR a, a TAL
HO. 1y ome te UM ERTETERIeNTR ge,



--- Page 133 (OCR) ---
(ae: Pate trermrer aren eleva 1 )

Betray (awe ewer) gr Rare
af at SaaS ar HaeTaeEe a alate "
Aree | (MAAK setarsras eves) a RazER RTT
aaa ares aa ae Pilar aewearegattenna-
earat atar | et ener siete var zeal
area Fa eae Aiea aH ea aida | aeraea
fh arena Pace ( amanda fe i
aaah FI CAURDA laaaaaeaT Cal sfaeea
(aa: fatty 398i sere: 1 )

() a Reraht arate @ saratinar sarees a ati
Sadat aie dif gt ay Baz | ig Rage area
Sarcign HRA Be aE FRAT at ahs 3H ARE orm suPRT Est
oF eons ear are we MnTEG ET TRAE Aer
wet aaa | ar rr SA eee Sr 1 OTe Oa HE TETTERTET
er Sa srereafh 1 at sua oes Fa OE FRTARETT |

oe Sadie ET wradPiatot aii 1 aad eras
areaETaR RumadiaeaTaTasARt 3
ara qauanitd qaiag sesatt-ae: sfaerdicaigar | azar
err emt wert stare tar ee Mae 1 eT MaTegTiay?
‘ema ao om cris a sme: 1 aarhg-
: aRaRTAgTTT | SAT sNBT! |
ats: | aetna died ails ear gem: ot 1 Ragas Bea
ara ore ae eH TTT: aT 1 RAHA HT.

{eT argent ge. Femur, Ale. oT
at (eat). ear, 4 hE mg get ohy...gmaeT, § Tor AT Ae.
rete or Roary eet HE Zor STeeTERTSTRAT aie
friiegr, © somata TET BAU. oleae,
Fer 1 ) wat at. ¢ Real, « mt gay re oioy wil Bet BA

«


--- Page 134 (OCR) ---
<e ere

werden — etal a ara ag fares oeiRar TAA
aeaqea TaaRiaRear aeedlaa rT TACT.
ehai 8 gyi gam | wHUtaTiyTAe ama a
aera, | aerate arear Paarl BA Camm) Cm)
ado —( aa ane) ar aaa fae a1arggee I)
fage—( |) aed geirat | gana Aft cae
awe witarar areaifed anh gma | CAT)
aoa aren esta PRaRealh | at ay se
Fatt Rear Sout Aya ea Beas a Hig
aa aan 1( a)
(a!) aR ay wa Bear | (SF )
ai 3 are oat RATT SRT
rake area HA BRA GAGA veagererarrl: | (a)
(am) Ge a or a Rokeoeae aiary ataiare ereaee
rerun Baier eae ARRAS Pres TA TERT sare ate
Fa ot ok gre ome FR Hg
agared tegen (q) ora Bere Pag a BHI (77) bd gag)
ere end Nene armen, se FA eg. (@)
aren Ue CRRA a eG cea Rig sere HBT ore
aga Satay reat 1 aor i OHRAR | (=) SRC ag FE
dae 1 (ae a comer TE SRT STATON GH
Rar iM aro war ea GALRaRT | at Teg oe TAL |
rer aeate St a | eae aE TRA me: 1 ere

arrcatgstioes cate enie Urs Re 1 ENT Te
cece ages 1 AR aI nk sou: afer RAT

Peres, FTTH, AMT THOME, YR. v AerOeTT
wath, waht frre VtorTa. CTT Th, Se GE CT €.
Fp at CT). 20 IMTS GT, 12 VERA IE, 2 wR
fPragis et AA mime wT ATOM Tf Seal
rhe ek ne Ae


--- Page 135 (OCR) ---
;
|

‘spss: | ee

figo—( sie) wat ar Fea mea ee EY
maa: | (C &)
( ait xa 1)
ado—( ant eg) ae cagnd aeintea—
Ara 1 (@)
fago—{ BARI ) sem aga | Tarra TTA
fet aaaed Patehreanti | (7)
( Bartram 1)
Figo—( ate Rint aiteram ty gene ga: GRTEAT
Seueneartes war: | Ca)
goon maid ar aigeaa gear | (
fazo—aataar fe afiaq 1 (Ct)
aeto—aa: ad tea a9 ve geet
ae eA aren TRG sae 1 (-w)

(Ca) IR 8 BA cet det
Bex wend wet reg sat « (at) or af i Ser ar
won croitaltincegieadt Roreored feoitéceeme | ( er) git grit 3a
aq Seer areas eo (& ) ore aC A rg GPeaTT
Se (-) aah are FH ARR (|) aw are HET HE
Arcata gine Feat ay care waren ir Big gee

i meant aa 1 einermRdieageat at
after 1 ergad pati | re aera aeanargTE: eae
vats 1 eae Fert gern, geen era eta: m1
‘ercen een ere 1 ey Ce | renee

Lawes are awrest wal Gre, e wa, | ae MOTOR CAH
seerare carat Fan Be AER Te HEA v CET FR, oP oy
ce RG Tet Tu ee HT we AT EER TR Ae, 4 ee (
aby Font ed, « eitare Rrezeet aah [ serene ) MovrereTeG, fee
spied, Read. ¢ aan, RAR. « H Kipwer oreTTa, te
AE Preerties (& qt ware Home se, 3



--- Page 136 (OCR) ---
“ erreeti

nag alata erarasagatarta aeaaa AAT
negara va aBeaR | gta Barer er
gal)
gdo—ari ey agua Misarfaears eaeeeroet
aa: | ageaeae | vent Bear: gaat woe |)
fago—eag (at)
(4 Rea 1)
ft sae |

(ae afeaeaneaedt tar )
sip —( RT | )

(a) eat Sa aommangain chen aaa comer was:
epee, agri « Bs Parad ea) Bom ga we
at Retamnst Powter wheofwermoed (AT TEE SHE Lo

et Ga Gist 1 eo arebwito | eet cep SHUTS EAT |
aaPraneqeinate ais enttaras sitateatiaa: ger 1 ae
eq 1 aftorcepraan | eeeatrarat enieerBartAlal at weer: eRe

eh avi Get 1 gered?

LeeqTNGA sata ada BRA
nots anit: | amma: Rare eat
a ait 9 rain arigaet Be: aa 1 Ge de
cgfton aaar sate Paneer orale Rout: | orRAT PaRMTATA wT

Was cea ah ga, ya on. AT aN RT
aftormeertapremrteter arcade r@rene= «mE Te
create. © (grt) sane See AUT A TRE TA
2 afta. § #1,



--- Page 137 (OCR) ---
Wet a ke oe

agiisg: | rae

( Sewe Rowea |) gare Raat ailerar arate Ada Bas ai
ae | ga
anitsniggaragemnsat
wughe sancmae Reeia
wenqeenaTioestHiit -
#8 am Green weet afar new
(Aer) ast Ringe sara: As eat
Sele | eames areaitet eet | ( xf RewFeer 1)
(aa: sete wera: 1)
qao—( uae!) oT ay faitg
soriaerval ay aagegea a fading

aetad: | Gers dead ame eit ara
ans eet: tag er aoe Equa ws ae
at: weet Seanarenaguaitiondia 1 aa: ast: | Be steer
coat sara oer came ar Ae ten a WEE a
erate wert atari wants 8: seca ela: erate: ales |
Reamer eg | ea TET RH AAT
averat@: wef ex Raed ae: 1 Bete
eutefeited amu 4 am eaitererahtaarenat-
Sowa aRRain oaks? sehen, | sews aks AewaHL
smear | eesti ere a: RENT: @ ET BBART TE
feat ot aaitaaapaneg: 2 Bacar sree set aera
Paeias

arohs Ria ges raf | AAMT: | Nera
ALN 3 Rermeaatters RearaeaTaARe SalPiews: 10
ey wai sHgs wage A A eRe at

a rei ene ea eT. ome id

4 Grae, § a: | APRREIT,



--- Page 138 (OCR) ---
Re weaaeat

fraamen aaatagvasife | (era!) eR NaT | Rear
VHS Meranda sar GRATE | ( F )

eT — (ee SUL ary agra: wie | HRT aA ATLL

fago—( sere 1)

Tsar A MAR aT Bem: sAIa: | aeRCTET
Rar arakera a aA |
(Agr aedenigareac 1)
Uae 1% a waa |
fago—aiid & Pag a weal) (aw)

Bet Sih!) aac antag | saegAe sift
MRS | (AR adh 1)
of Beare |) avarag aA HaaaeT: | ( 7)
aay | Te!)

+ stom: qfRersta etarraferet Rt
ator aaa aga ae!
sitet a are af aegitan: ea Yt
eat BeAaAT asf aw |W

(ar) Gat ag Remtwericedlt & aeretisterami ot agerett
ea aoe gre ttre che Recent a ora ol axaEDT
eer aR RAT RT SAteeaonhy ay Ga RA AE
(aa) Seat & PHAZE GAH (a) aneTEG eHETEG erase |
aan aktgrat gana, recht wa Ie eT: Te, SRA A
‘spear ofa sar gear | STOTT ie |B sro ela eraReT a | Aa
eve ge Ge (ae TTT | ert ALM: THAT:
geet aa at crea wt aera | af act ar eT OTE

Tar ( Rane atewee 1) eee Re, € (atorse 1) A wre

aie. 9 aT, oe FS A, v aH, STATA. A

re. (oft WEN, TIER ¥ oHHT ar, STW; aig TEAR.
Reger, < weTTGG AAT MTT ae. TI. te aT
2 exaraae BRR eM. 72 Hi AeEa PR Hee SAE oF
TERS, Rereeeee aE ge eT Asrrore oT SHR ere,



--- Page 139 (OCR) ---
aguisg: | at

fgo— a sae aise dara | aT ay ata
Reade AAI gas 1 wat vasPeafhfa wire 1% )

oT — sag UA Ahan | way Regeer a BAI
wie a aaaenag |

fago—( wet Rewer) as gRlnaat | ora | WH we
war PARAReAs ware Mat | (aw)

eT Praag | at TAPaTEge | agaeera |

(feegs sea 1)

ae —( beat carat ioe GR Palle)

Susred GaTaTa Teal THATS |
denaea aide ageivareTda AA New

(am ) ai wore a omer HAE 1 OG
Rory gra 1 a a okt ra ( wT
1am BA oe BAMA eat cw WRT

ah gt gitar afar ei ae ee aeTT ae aT AAT
Ga me§ hs sear: orga Gaia aR aaeweaE aTaN maT | eT
ewer a | Maa season at dare Af ge 1 AR AT
sarees ado —ar ay eee BUR AR 1 He —( SRL) AR
Pas rg wwe Roath gaa ae Tay sea TA. eT
aay ata, 1 erat eqea a Bal” qeaAA aTEATOTAV TEATS:
om araargs at RASC aan, Mas era: gee wea: at
etm are faeertvar Garp (wr are STATS"
FaRG | oT TERRIA RETTETAATATTORA | TAA:
ater | cae seaeht xterra: 1 fea ah
Farr mOSPSURA | ser: awiesra: Geral HTT
area SYN SAT RATT GAT SATAY STRAT ETE TT GATT
eiawag att ada area area | gure: UYU

2 ocaaiary Siem ae am, ere, 4 oR (TERT FE
arat wat Geri) ore. v Feu, THR, 4 aries, ute,
Se Let me Rei oT STR, < me yee TET
wa coroner Tere eeRa ali ae a f
are aH WE Ro, <a, pep



--- Page 140 (OCR) ---
RR eres

ardea of aitaetiang | 2a seilat aag eet gt afta |
figo—arararmicala | (aan) (am )

ais —( 1) ame ea ga: Sela are: 1

figo—( Reaisneter owe! ) ait ae Ragianienaea |
waht FS Bear ge AAV | (Cw)

(cet: sea Me ae 1)

ago —( ath) wag sag vat | Ad: CT ay BANE
wtiaat Raeral Ba Ral FRafigent ak Rete 1 (aT)
TWAT aed SATA |
aoa srerea | (8 Rewer Reortien we ge:
sug 1) Aqaada oa we Rat | agate: | ( )

( a9 1) sag mag Ba: | a Rea aR
\
aa any | aeMeeaTAAg(oTT |
AL TI AINE |

( feral 1)

(em) aed To Ce) A aorer ar UAL oak A 1 wane
2A Rha we sw (1) Tse eae om
aOR now Gem semcsa
GARG Sa ar 5 paar: aT | aaa TMT eee |
ati aoa: ga: 1 aie) a” af arn 1 AG,
ae Reger: 1 deramTeRAa” aR maT | AR

a maey situs; saRat afte. g CURR eel mae a; eee
eat, agains, yar ores, v aritterar gee, 4 we; RT
arfigi. § corrate. © oot es, < oxo, ¢ co —( weftatem |)
Aoi TE Ge SO | Rate Ie ATR LITO He
fare Rreed remeT oI afer ahrOETR, te

smagaatteniiet er dt 1 (of eat 1)
te Rat, 28 ORE, te,


--- Page 141 (OCR) ---
aaiise: | aR

aist—faaaig Ra: bene: |
farte—tiea sao |
Ts—aaata, ear sae Rea: Aghia |
fasto—3a gaa | Saft Raters eetaalt-
Raatigqerategltattor ager aeayea reat eeagniaheaea
Areetalerera Bar aaPabagarsat: |
TRAGER |
fierto—aa: area asieearenr
aitaaarentaarnited asta |
Fagot cares | ava a eH)
WHA |
faqo—aa gahaat—
i fries rangeaefigaercatst
fgaatagcan
anrginfeageasameeiastiraatcien
ieagiteantatrercaaed savage v4 1
(Cae) a a arrarer | Bait Fer H Rarer a

PHA 1 eee geet ome wlRgeeae | WeraReTEETETE: |
aii atrovent ghare graha Merehg a Ba REET Rae
wacgtaaatace | sama Ret autatg eraemaftan
oftad grtrreraaarag ailkraart eieral eae wera | ‘aferetea-
Bang? aR eae oe 1 ad hoe | eR | wae eras Br
a water: edt aig Gree eri gs evar goer meme | area
coreata feet ea 1 great echt Gor: 1 gia fA we 1 Bat aaa: eT
sar ga: (Ba 1 gee Be Oe ee: SeTSRH Coa be

‘aed, sae; Be
ahtrcfeoene ar Ma om
Rare wee AAR. TT. ATOR, STAT.

«tt Sremeieahs. | get aM, © Memes FET
cranfire, mae, ose amete; oF. Memes



--- Page 142 (OCR) ---
ae wreeat

a a
eqararattia eareaecet adigogiar |
mgaiage & atawutedgreritaa-
Saale SAVE TTA ATE ET GH
fago—aag Fag HA | ranean: 1 (eae
fet) (mm)
trang Aaa arg RAF eet vet asa
seta govt aha | aaa: |
fargo — 2a adr arOaTARY Aneg AeA Sarai Fa
sao eatin toraaM ONG: Ts TATTTSO |
7 sige geuat aiaeacrann: Meal AAAS |

Par a Orga, | wife: ere ge
Ee
ay die: | atocer sole Saosttaree
deer an waite ee Rata: CH BA eat tT
fate: war Fare Fret a ea
SAGO | SMT TT NS TREATS |
sare Frente eaten in at es AAA ee |
een Omit sear FH aR, ek SYST TRI ET: HRT
afte afte, Gaeta ORqraRT sea ARAL TAM | BA
aden: gaa: ape, Tiaras: aor ae oreget CHa
psa apes exo Me eh, MTC RAE: | ET
spar geaeds a oma a1 wRRse: @ Sowales oT eTEN
gba a eneaer eae: | egaTatsHere: | gaHARRE ATL GU
gers comm 1 a aD daraaMa Legale: sgeTL| Be

Poe, 8 Se we, oilgmey eee, va waiy a
warties arerat are ramea rN eK RMR | ea
A eee. «aOR To, Cees Brea aTe, & oT
arnpiremranaineh MERA ATS, ¢ HH AG, § TERA HORT
gee Foe wih arwmgRT ohne. tT,


--- Page 143 (OCR) ---
aguisg: | &

ef o— a9 srerTate | ( 8% Revaasion we Fen |) ()
(ara: fa rere 1 )
Brato—aaeT Bea THR FTAA TT |
caterienAagars aaa | (saa) | ga wy
wal | aenagaanht | (se 1) sag nag Hal | Bai en
Tae agate: ailhaeaes mT | ast
waiaaraga ef | ( @ )
UH —aiea a: Agar | axel se |
Raa o— aes aTTITAAT | ( aT)
(fro ga: ARomeetoaTeA ae aE 1)
Aezanfier:—( Rvst-Snae 1)
sore seonfaqraaneatingara
aia peace arngafaieaaTs: uo |
(a) Ra oO 1 (am) ere Reig ea

more 1 ar Raerg of samen 4 (ap) at RA ETA |
(a) aoa sah eae GraiieaoRTT |
ae Sea data aiengiitiewees

TAT MTARTTE TARA
amd fremer 1 Rey afe oq emenies eft Gis easTEREIeT!
exe eae i et a | (Rr ae eCoRAT | eT UR TR BA
OTAaAe | RBI Reet a mT TET eT GORA
ere wt ao | A aeTTTamTeaet eed we eT
ae aTBTABsEE: TATE cMARET a aN wo Uv

a Reman. < aRer (aihea tag eG ae (Tamer
ma 1) wate eT LT aueeeg ORT eee SEL)
sig. 9 ot raion METI“ gen, ¥ TITY oHTETTTTT
(oon emgmeret ) ag siete eeiieoqeoT (avMieAEE
erm: ) EERE wey GAR NOE LE gor. orm ( oR)



--- Page 144 (OCR) ---
ae Teareeal

arate (31 |) ad: on aebamnfea: | (H )
ego—nag ag 2p 1 27 |
f& acoat aarg start ated HS SaSA |
areata saa Feta errnles we w
aa at Pagal TIAA |
mn afearat Tae TRAST SAGA |
area attest usu(@)
a area walea a | FeaseAAEMA Baw!

ws —ag Re aaa! aaARi’ genet Bat | Goria
caatani@at Racieaaagea: | aR 1 weal

wal ag eeanieei |
ag tat 12a
Retry Fergh ret aftedt @ at |
fe aaa ea RR or
ak at ( ager ieee
ar geen get ot ot rar ee eee |
8 G8 et Ge areFaI
(a1) Bere orate BAC 1 HRA ovagEH Boz aod oa

‘fae ercwern FRA 1 oat (% aa: OnE: ae a TINE: eR: REAL
eat a rH AGT: Ge: TS sae: aT: AEG sa: Gaga:
wasian | ore 2 1 aqifeara eae: uc 0 wa a
after Gar 1 aux gata weer caged gware aege: aoa saTaO
sada eda is erm Sreghexniea Rentrawtensa wea
we TaeEMiargesl faakenkeeoaals aaaeTTE-
rem omar: eae: | Zon ges “ehhh a” 3
diqrat ‘garea:’ Qf oeeRreat ws 1 fener rat overeat

qodind, «Re i wee Morgy,

2G, rong v ATT HOH ae Te ET ET

Aeon eee gs, TR Fare AG Te (FER
(oomTs) ag. | aN, © cramer, < A GARG,


--- Page 145 (OCR) ---
aqiise: | ae

rare arate | (x srr) ( & )
(att Rea area seTATaT 1)

rato areas salts ors Gea F aleaaR
site serTTA: | CD
_ Reo —aiRRgeaga: we
( ata aterm: 1) (aT)

qrado—( set!) stag saeardga:

wR aga aa |
RATT |

°

i | deed aa t

Ca)
afaalalaaaare |

( araaegtettaia 1)

arate seqadlfiezarey |

agate — ake suas | ( xe Het sat gen GRIT
aaera| )

aftexaanaareqareatianfa Gaerst at
aia Regereogengatd & gerry, tt

adie aa S)

(ae) at a HATA Ce) STS
7 afte Gexmnag gered | (ar) ohiRegrogart ay Cal aEATC
age wth (aq) ag Sg wrath (CS) SR armay

eexararage 83 SAR Bau at
anita Rearemgeagasl + TH, UL

at Brag ie
faa: oiPtora: 1 sift: fsa: dawara: ate: Proclear: 1 set are
ear: | ions eae: aga ard excrete Tea FRR
SASATASATA,1 BALE | eee: aT: Ga aT Bat ae
equated a chai 1 eaanen RetfARGT: 1 gerd Zagat:
at ant eat a gerd clan u te Steagerer srarserse

Tam Moms wegTAT Ue ae | wee, = aR NR
Chea afi een, ARE He, vm a:

aster ag eee AEA. 4 ae (mn): see, me Rite od

trent» we, 9 Sree Cae afirert ceafhe,



--- Page 146 (OCR) ---
ee ear

ato —( stineseararrenaet!) sistant | 3a

qeatea anf Sarrearorngge eran: ee 0.
arato—ararinst | )
fags) on: qrearge Rraarfea ee
qeaifiiet afia: aR asa aRgEa ard aaa eat)

( et: afar ade)

q—( aaiegvat |) ag sag Hal | Te ata
raat RengaR—ea as Raa: sara e
ateshga segitra vers: | aaele Misia Gage
eat aR BACATTA wala | ( mT)
iam (@) Si eTNATH eee

fe
eee 1a Een GAN we cy erat
ig AE wat Lora Soko HARK a
“ewe cad eae rent ger a oe 1 at Sei a
solder Se ETE UNG | AY ORE ee ee a |
tra fa | i awd GTA STA SHS OT Alec ot
caterer SET er Here: HARRAH TET g CofrRRNRITIAT: Hie
wd) @ erat: wg ne a aeTET: eT Mes ANAT
aa aft Page a a8 fe ai
ata: Rear

gt AST art
faenfgerat emer ar ander (eaad: ger
erie 1 araaacrraeare qin ea

sagt Pare ig |

«see am -AE AE TH,

ba eae. 8 TET. ues cant Bre sage
etre seen waaNees, sereewe.. aT Fee ee ON eet
Feeney erga gerry


--- Page 147 (OCR) ---
a

agiise: | ae

arato— aga Reg aaReasreR | AIgezEITT
aurea agua: | i araderarariga: | ( & )
wa—aate Bat | (eam wR) a ReraaT
aria
WegeifeRs—ata srerqa | ( ge: ARE aA 1)
(errr) am: gata Baisrei Fa Breer | (we)
st—ig wea: |
aato—araaaie ase ef Bey aftaiten | (m1)
BIA o— AeA | ( Wasnt ae ewan) (q)
TAI —aRran sea Terai agUee |
ego — aie rats | ( eh eho we Mona: |) (@)
( car afta warcimrareiat ages
aa HA — raver) adh ator
Sint sama qenferdolaraerar-
sitataar ee fattrat aig
“(a ) aman Ping aa Ezond 1 mast
sng) 18 ara Beg ae 1 (er) ATTA BAY a ae
aeatt aed Bo UhaeeR 1 ( at) SAMS TS GEARY aR
mem (4) BA so (w) BA TY

<qpu aad’ <Q see 1 dwn upd: sade | Exar
Qaantearaientead: | Qader dager Aeefregrat eet
segenecedentatiged set 1 organ: are: ROAR aTH
aarfara CR | aaaratsiieny 1 wer ea: | ger Rebar
ata aaa Ste | SU: eR aaa ov SSeTEH ga | TT
wale SNE: TIGA 3a ona: wre: | Ardara eal
eeptongaeteehed: | falrat weedeat sre aapanat

aga, pe Dea, reas, 2 endear ee, ot a UA.


--- Page 148 (OCR) ---
Yoo wae

ach Reqatenseafirs: went ascrat
greata gagea Agar area was wer CR
arson —adye ae ag Parenti xemetia ae
aerate RacareRaTTaTe | Ea |
age erred saaitett srereaat-
afteat aff feredidact averse: |
wat art seartert agar
sem: area aa f@ aftetidise: gaa u Leu
Saget 88 ea) aT: 1 CD)
ayo fewer a8 caanst eisert 1) apey si
ad waar at A Tage see FAT |
(8) GG A

eg onrtaaat aia aang aalesieat: 1 agrarian:
cenfefamied ama u v8 w Romearadeeting, 1 oat geAT ermeR
Re cranes apremiemrana 1 Bate iata 1
eer ay af: eared ieee rae: eT age
areran “warrat” af or god (| a Raeah—arraTETe

imaegdr: emer ff seafemonfeaia aisle 1 ame:

srgeroaeit: efter! seat ef fexaltaeraitata wieate | RcaeaIe
eee fq ceeowsat ey rERieTTeNAAA AEP, Lee RA
ised fitsaera ant seat af eaegsl anol agar areata ae
afta wat wats 1 Geasreneening | faerarmeNraTaIe | et
sitermesrnrts eames Veateaeme aaa IheRdamaRTNERER:|
agth—‘aitameratiredisag: raat: ? ef faeries ge a 92
tC BERRI) Ame, § APNETENTC.c MART GaMTORaTOR:. vote
anita Raion: eraser Fereae, 6 mY, IE) eT
wre, < ont eet,



--- Page 149 (OCR) ---
TAaISR: | rok

apeeai——aurea sia arezay | afte dara gear
smiferet: | a

AB Yo— arse ar Faz | nels uAye wre
gOA yuoUi eiargs | GR afew 1)

fige—A cH Uy Ra: | agaadeanra: | ( % )

aBo—( Stet!) Pasiaai wen: |

qat——( Ser) a) aa

ago—argaens | ~

ist——sinamaaaala |

fago—eaarama | soaeTIET: | (@)

( ayfteeath 1 )
Sraeq:-—2a ae: THAI |
WHS Hi es) ge ea AT
( masa aaftat 1),

fago-—araiea car BA aTAaTT

araato——arg sort | (a)

AAIo— APA acaaAVed FAA

(si safe)
ist — 4 agua af Gud wreaa: feta 1
(&) a odrag ware 1 a svatag ome (a) ae

area, 1 aReg sme 1 (a) set er BA sree AME 1
(a) seer gout

3a faamargar seamen selfaregrare Gare: esa oreo
agi dud Reataiseenr ate erat apereeedard geraay srgeRha-
1 SRO. § CTTO OTST MANA, | TAMIA. WRT
rmnamerge EareTaTeT I | Fags ager omega | THT A
cgpara 1) od ste. wor ues sree ArT | FEE
cara. § aaah ga, «UIT Na ER aie < Fea. 8 TT
see. ( g Bet aT | HE TURRET ). 70 sTeTe eS TT
Bet ore: oa, sta, te (oma |) a. 8 ( STREET
AE ty CRT Ta sore STF, fre



--- Page 150 (OCR) ---
oR weraeat

aayo——( Serres Moen 1) Ba a Se Fi Fg
vant | ( Hae |)

arta ——( swear!) at fag et Ra Fart
aqui: eafaeaia | ( &)

Tat Pita, | ad age Fe Ase!

arre—(sn 1) aime Pratt aca Seriae |
aR |

agom( wen!) Ba a aed Paha aude see
waar: | ara evan gar eA aT ange
auaaant Tagiges Aaa 9 suber aa ae

T(r BA Abas eaenigerttea: aaa

gro (fer) arg eta SAA AeA ga)
bP ae | CT)
araeartatar AAR FART |

ea cdr 1 wah eal @ueeaHeL (@) LT

sear gaed ea a eee ee Teernngentse
vex tere lan GA a AANA: oveR.

omer: ue witenht w ere RRO | CoAT | Te
rereaereht Dreads age eda wt Area TAT
Fawae Ager TTR. § FeTTo, —faeheM

ser At Tee FT BATTERS; AAT MOT a BM TAA
sagen a mae eH se | ATA SIRT A ETE
Rigtatn Fem 1TH MEE Sera wa | eT Te
eae Bare airmaegeenGietrae Ba ae, wT gE
free aftr erat nar TES,


--- Page 151 (OCR) ---
agaisg: | oR

areto—( eH!) gr gant aa | a afihh
Tenis BraraAle 1 Bie H siaaay | ( F )

UAT 3A aerate eave | geamier aftdaer are
ag afediieaa araiaa a asiag | ( ee ayers geal)

ao aga BSAA TAT ae BAT AAT | (@)

(nausea: 1)
wraint taughraiia Hredefaenaneara
wredraragurererattgtrareaeaa aaa: |

PeHiemdtl wees FATT
WU Hataiera re watareadiseageste: u teu

aft 31

Paidrenardisdl aisygrars get
aftcalea & Geanaaiie aagfeeet u 24 0

(5) at eet meee 1 et RIA eH
afore (er) sam ae Oe tat

a 1 eearonfena 1 ofiat caret
edot tqemt avira fe sneer:
1 aramt errgeragaiet anf ormai Bet rate
SormenaTaA ayia: AP: reel: ara: TEE TET: | GA
gaat: qaieat: ataradst alermid sea ala: exe: oe
RESTS FAA Be aie ord: Showa: Sea aeTaETT: ee

weer AMAL RAHAT ge Brat A Rea: eA: RL
eed teen eet et eae: | wr: UY

vera, & areet—aft aftr eae | rae, 4 ETH
atthe ge, y srerert—tran (arene 1) ere Faerie: aera.

te afar armvan; gfrenier


--- Page 152 (OCR) ---
to waraeai

re —( Beaders |) BaMTTSHA: | 8s BA aTAATAT
apar | et BA aNRAgT |

arezo—aneiga Raa TRAE |)

qist— aa santternteent 24 agefear | aA
aareee navaltle |

atayo— stig waren: Be 4 Aled | TI BS AAT
ffoiag fata afar arifter Rawat | aati aRaraa-

arg | (@)
qat— ae BA aia Aaas | ca veal |
a gear: FAR |

Fago—ommrantit wie!) eer aT aed aretl B (7)

aro ( seetewrs |) Rg ae aurea Favela | Gi.
fe orate aren ene afer 1)

aa qrgad
Praenfiet earey |
ata ara: fara:
weaqerarar Ter fe ea wi GU

Cam) oman Sey ter (a) ome He er FE a
anes, oa ge TONG ve ret er ero Rae
a ofteing erat 1 (at) eth at a WH ara AA
Fanta aaeat eather eat adage: aowaw ciaeeqatTAT: |
aguifid abating: ae om Fa 1 ab Rea Re RE
rar | agen rales ge 1 Se: Sw oHRgl ARATE HES
Fe wea | sai afer aist eR a: ee RRE CLAT aT aT
area Ba Baar Pageant a TTT aS GRAS a
7 are eg aeamaiees, 2 cutee Mh Rega | sare,
ee et (we agli |) ae Rs GAT | ( Rear a TE
erat 1) RF wre, 1 ott Feo, von cH
See, § ea» forty, fee
Romig oorg FR to OAR See TCE NONE Loa
trea Prehe 8re, te TAT ste,



--- Page 153 (OCR) ---
agilse: | eg

rat o—aei ne gaia aaareTaRNAATAGTT |
aaeneardgatargatrenti 1 ( # )

fago—( aiteminnd gars) wal real B oeqiaTel
waft | @ )

ago—ay oe oa saad aA: | aeAAIT TET
wARGHRRs Jesaremancgtiags |

arseq—er 2a Paanaroa ways aaAger
Tar | or ar seis | weak areas |

( sistema arated 1)
( aa: afta Anedaar aaeer 1 )

Ato —( Raises) er Ra aac: TRAY ga
ae: | ( Rta avitdien!) a gaadt Rem afteat
a GraraaIAz | ( 7 )

Tr Sar earRagaseT aaa AMIR
ae | ( Raa |) ah A Pare a

(am) vt af gramesig gon wa
a orsrat Go eget | (we) A oe
(a1) dat ened cart gaat am gene RffaT ee
geen |
BE 1 erewere  anwA aU Ie 1 ERE HONE eer TIA
erat Rafe Bar cee | ougraGReRe mag | ewagemTd-
fad sek Flge  aftrwedr eran Tf
fem Rare goareard Zee Gey HA gym ,

a semgarer 1 durant sear PRAT A

7 geAgE car Sao, fied, 8 ee aay
3 aemat—aim ( gfeorngery freee!) caqeerer aa gq Cee
(soviiordves eine!) wemremeTeRT AR mie | meet
area 1a ace Pee, v TT aN |) aR Te,» at
Ge ant we § RCITTT HB, & mt gHEOHT ToT,

ane Foon | aE AR, < oTeTNRT. FR |
wer ae gaareareot Aas GTO, bie a



--- Page 154 (OCR) ---
|
Rok wareat
}
I

saree —( a4 eg ia!) amreiga: | add ea
gah 8 Rater: daa: | (A!) aiRaraat a
sia ¥al | ( % )
wie oe |
aga seat fee oa witasit ( smdisnaier 1)
aa Rifinigg saete & eaaraegaa |
(hea ag eaale fe ae Feredaaif& (sitet agri) aa
wate wadifite: Raatsaeerea az Yo 0
(88 abe eas: eed ae) al RONAsTTasd
ati: | BA aaraltie aavalAte |

ert sailsft aadi a zeta Wa: |
are: Senate eaetea TR AAT eH
( waitin Retisadiag andivet 1 geM 1) aay HeeTEERL |

Lodt cmp ot) Reanseaat

ooe ormael car GE Uivuor Ga Siena aga
Meena ofteg ae (we) Ra TEE orm |
‘wlan ga ora omaT eT AR
fg eB eaeoreyenigg et OWT 1H weTeTTET
aed Rnea ogee Ae) ea: remade: wad gt at
Bah meee p90 1 GARR sR Ha Te aT 1 He
rei

Yarare, ¢ at uae Ae 1 aga

eM EH, AR, | ATeTe, oTmEE, aT A AAR TE
ofl fre Seat. 228 awitteie, re ofan. ty eet
HoRemERETe ge OT UTR, py STH eaTHe STE,



--- Page 155 (OCR) ---
| satis: 1 Row

Tatar
araea:— 34 garth argstian: er: |

wt aaTeT—
ago—fnaai aera: |
wa aie

fige Wag Hag HAL! ( H )
we afte fis Paqfieqarey 0 8
figo—a: ar dae Be | Fame | AR Aa
aRaLpiraneaa Teal ay ga: Vaiswet Wa Mer
aft | anita (@)

UNA ef cagaaeiReriar bene |
arrqo—( efter!) saga gid Rar | (a )
ago—( araitet te ward 1) apa
apa — ae aaa AAR
ago—( tamale |) Bagg vi
AF eae
ago—AA ga: gai aaa |

(a Yay tg wd 1 () AT TERE A ee HL CELI
ise Ber eeheger erefequ BET LHI aH He Best aR RIM
meaesit tat & Rea Ga (aT) 8Y

watienataqaemst aaaayte
+ a amaatagar
safe fom 1% a eat ecaltreciar | OM a
Ree TEU YSU aaaAiRASEAIER BL FE
| eg mares ea ore Plead: 1 om agyitarsemeat alter:

My arent mre: 1 Be ear aa rrepfbar: ee. ae RE:
We, Rqreisrr, sere oe. yeah wit, eit
Te gfe. pret Tae, au. raat
eeeonoen itd oer cat sree ergs RE MOTTE. AT ERE!


--- Page 156 (OCR) ---
hee verteeati

araao— aaa oar BY AMTTETA AAHeaTATEA-
tocar 1 FART | vt Cr UTR aera! @)

era —( BL!) aieqeraiiA eae | HTT a aaa
Rahreaieate |

ayo—( FE) area aI grea aRFaRA BS
AT areal aemreresfet aa ae faetava gear
earediag | ( FERMI) agen a ag wag waa
aaRATETIATTAT |

ate —( eat Rater are, 4) wana agaéa:| (a)

ayo—( HL!) Basia argu: | ( +4 Fava)

Bijo—el art at ora FAA ARH aides |
(eRe apie ere regeTAT |) ( aT)
mL) a aaah FAT AA ARTA

at
aioe ‘yatta aavafare aavaiie (@)
—aamiaarer eee Ramada |
eee RE eh
(a) Sra Gar Fe ere
GP Pare 1 og oH ToT UE | ( eT) GE ora a:
sigh 1 (at) re at sg 9 (1 RMR oiBaerme| (2) OF RE

7 ra Bt feat arg “ego Ga
beast Fafem tae” earn TTT
PEAT Bel ATANTATAT

aavieciineent =a. al
a maa, » area. € OT a

i
;
;


--- Page 157 (OCR) ---
agilsg: | ke

fago—( banat ate!) gaala Aa A 7
By AMAFARARET: sea AAA’ | (wR)

ago—( sehr) area aavafae aafte 1
afad saad 8 ata gant | aaa |

Ao sare wraveUt og ee!) BargTAT MET
Bear a ama ye aaa | ( eisai AO) Cw)

Aro—( at ig. sot 1) CAAA eataht ara
aE aly | (A FS va eave walt areal 1) ( svated +)
orga Ba weataeat gina | aaraareT ea |)

erot—( safeties) gare Bt | ( ee oat wa)

Ado—aiga sana ae Be
giateante | Ya smal a ARE 1 (1)

aa after Aerereraa 1)

ats —

(a) Md Son ag sah a et
(a) frau Fa ae Mig 1 CTD REE, lap
eee eh FA aM fT ABE aE 5 aii
Gebers 1 eat ona wero | (ores crearraTeTpAT
aftal eg ars gaia | Hi fo Maen |

aftwartsebare 1 faage see
Rerawaentegh: | gar |
sagatearaitet 9% Agata
ala Gi sheauser gator:

2 SA, 1 te RET, 3 eG aT CTIA
a 1 gems A sear HET AA, v CD, ree —ere—egeR hy
afterat 1) ara, q ummaTe, © gt arnitet mah; eee eT
aaa. ¢ omrarang, Sraige, & Tt MIGHT. te CORN AlBeT es a,
tr seats. 12 ont o ane wii

9°



--- Page 158 (OCR) ---
tte warren

wea: sifted aftent sreaiiecets: sit:
‘aed weit esha age aRTe AT GeRAT Ul Re
(34 Aer) aa af fmt | Sebqearanriaeaha
Faegieat eufiafteaa | (Meld) ae Hs | are
gral | (#741) aiag sag 2a: | 2a eraah AeA
Barada Baa |
Tarai aaa Bae gq |
Aprero—ateaaaatad 2: | a4 Berea |
( ei earediagattas 1 )

aime o—{ wars 1) Ba gaa | 4 fesargiear
Aner ae aise: afi aeleake a AMAT eT ARE
coy | aaereraaaen®: wread aga: stedaraait fe
ato Rem vaacTUBIas ofeear at a sar

Breed Teg GR: | ETRE

aa § sa gE cto exer: fu eB et
Ha ratawr agaarag ager tout HUET
3 a AT aT Baer maEAT deze delves Agar
a eater BE Pg sat: ek seereermeceRT: SAE witer-

(6, sek aga Bi: grag: Soe: ae aaa

maa agrgatdeng, fas

mou oreaeel AUT aa ATA
bre: | Regawalt fifa: ogee:
Taree | eis: ata me aR

egeha enero. ere $9 mgr «(oa
ot cer Be; Ta MENT, < YF Rare or em, reenfatpome
ee : y



--- Page 159 (OCR) ---
agiisg: 1 caay

aeeyo—aar wae afta Aa aE ARIS
Ree areas were: aa: |

Waa: ge aor | aR Bear ee gh
eater |

goa orreraNtasaT CT TM STITT
gaa 8 aaard aPheadifa 1 (a )

To —( Feet) atreqeanr gealisnaishe sacha |

area ——aarergafe Ba: |

wn RegieerAs aa achat ca |

@irero— aa way | aeamsae sarAT wT: BA
Ba aalag | eerie agyltar ga: aera | (Meee )
atqraraa aPea: aaf qareiel ax 4 aT |
arergo—( ai!) air) agate fH 4 ANA TMLee

SATCTARA, | TA Ra GeTATMTAR 5
alt eas 1 emerralterea aero
at aeeliarraear stat | ory Ba yaad

art Ret want ad Reenter Re

aa A sme, em aTame—aAt@ TTA! UE we
ened Gaara erter Aeracronfarngaterr aaa Bela
ge eruon Sree i) Sie ate hs
PR TR RTE ARTA § 0

ama) ee | ore eToMRE, ¥ Fao’, ET Cafe < are,



--- Page 160 (OCR) ---
RRR wae

Aigo—wae gg car Asaesemfna: | (CH) F
arago—( ee eri) GE WaT TR | cara
a waged vag | (wee Stadkeser wader
aaegng |) ange setedart | (a)
aarrto——( SRG cath rand) Fy ogee BABA
arate —aniga & ace: Aager | awa gs
aay a aga wala | (eft saa 1) (a7)
arabe BH | ( eae ae)
fago--( #1) & Gas eA altars eeanar
Baar | (7) 4
ago— gene eat Ahaeagzale |
Prieto aseatatisit tga: | a ageaay
fh 8 aa: Reged |
wet — na: eal

of ere
fr cerirer araateaea 1

ot mitecarediamrney waite
Br Ro... 1 rae —oiga. agai a
‘qareeat us: gfeq sama Bie
CY eva a ter | emery:
eeera aot etre serena! a: | aa yO ae

a
wagers 8 eee ge, | TAD Tega code | (caret rT
BiG) soe GT ee. SEAM eat aT >
dig, diner evel METH, < orm, SORT, MTA, F
te oneal, tr oe Croat, sag aa est comma stereat,-
ge oniHomeg, 23 ae Reem, ty Ht org erg HEN ge,



--- Page 161 (OCR) ---
agilsg: | ate

FA iftarmen @ afietieranSren:, see:
fi after ean araareage® aah Ban ezETA UREN
aafiang |

aNEgd i
feite ang alfa fagaaate ier eae ea
(af freee: @4 1)

edgar are sadicg: |
eft Aire afte wanted carat aH aT |

Seton were ddequeer Ser Pree | ee a em

mp neem s hs

seater nfo wrx a 0 A
aE gar

crate Fite 3 afte. « RFE. 1 Ae, y OEE,

here pot corer PPeTERET ree

aeticeqgaca aren wares wer

ar om) TET

oat set qaractionat am werent

Fiarat ae, © goeatercnianrtett ster Fe are 5
aor wT.


--- Page 162 (No text found) ---

--- Page 163 (OCR) ---
SRT: |

eres
ora Aas: ay | gresngeret at)
or samaRee wey ale
aaisonigpae we | gaat pare Re
seneaany Why | ee: ganda ag
se wea | eo a ate ane
rasa wig | RR garde aR
aitrasitqans AAR | Rhearerateat wy,
auechaadiat 2 62 | Seat agaareer wre
BR ER ak | Rarer cry
serena Tae ys | areraRgedaa wa
sree tafteat wie | ne adage an
we G8 BEAT 195 | aid rea ra
weaaerattat - uel Te Fai ETS we
ayeheslet | eegoecepege ais
seein Sv | gfteara Gsm 88
siiguraeat aay are | 1.
waren 188 | argiteemt ag: u

| set sett fia 1c
| ge: gaia exe, UW :
|amefhact Gea = 5

Segre geet aR
weret cara wt
bad saret

fone sivas Ke Pe er te ans
tl: Reeth: TERS RR, ae

i aun | Star: 9 ware an
Sarton 9193 | aie afar fear BR
epegt ater us | gar aealastT RRA
Baddondlg + any. | Ree get gar ws
dh wii go: vans | Hoar ape aR
fraggelaat ne | aT aera: SM: cir

die: ecient use | ade ows! we



--- Page 164 (OCR) ---
4a

aS aeETaTET
aratsfin a4
ag Fates Ree,
usd thera
era
Referasersteret
feareneeerS
ee FR

ane hist wad

statadeaer’
often TPR:

ane] afiell Riga: 3A
ag | Aicienteah ete
cet, | dart aga sree
aus.) Saree AiR set
ais, | Sate ae
giay | gard: ae: Bo
auto | Reregett fears
veins | erent eT
in | epeeta eA
36 se wana

wage | eaerneegi,
qa3 | Salet Bear

sane) Rear dear’ we

ah
aie
Ww
uy

rk
wt
ane
AIG
ara
ag
wie
wine
we


--- Page 165 (OCR) ---
TRANSLATIO:

Bot 1.

May the handful of flowers, thrown by Girija
rvati) at the time of worshipping (waiting on)
S'ambhu, protect you (andus)!—that handfal, which
was intended to foll on his head, but which, giving way
in the middle, fell between, as she, standing on tip-
too, but repeatedly brought to a stooping posture by
the weight of her breasts, became nervous (lit. was over~
come with shame), having come within the range of
his three wistful eyes, and manifested tremor, accom-
panied by horripilation and the appearance of perspira-
tion. (1)
Moreover—

May Gauri, who at the time of hor first meoting
(with her husband), hastened forth through eager-
ness but turned back through inborn bashfulness,
who was again led before (made to face) him by the
various persuasive words of her kinswomen, but who
on beholding her husband in front of her, displayed a
leaning towards shyness (Jit. fright), and who was
embraced, her hair standing on end, by Siva, smiling
(at her embarrassment), be for your good | (2)

Again,

May he grant protection to you whom the daughter of the inguin:
tala (lord) and Lakshnt thas addressed in weuth=-

(e) Yor mo formerly did the Ssh-bannered god (Mudana) meet
bis destruct jit is meet, thon, O shameless one, thet
thom mbouldst bear the many-coursed one (Gaigt, on thy head) ia
my presence. Do then conciliate ber lone who is orookod by
nature, und let go thy hold (or, embrace), Odark-necked one, of me.

@) For (that thou chouldst obéato) me, did the feh-bannered
‘one (the ea) formerly suffer churaing at thy hands; ao it is meet,
Osbameless one, that thou shouldst, in my very presence, keep)
‘company with one who leads a msny-coursed (loose) life :. do.then
conellisto, © Rrishoa, her whois of « cunning anind, and Iet go fy
liald (embrace) of my neck.



--- Page 166 (OCR) ---
bp. 2-5. Ey [ Act I.

And further?

May Siva protect you!—(Siva) who laughed
(heartily) when thus narrating to the goddess (Parvati) ,
his destruction of Daksha’s sacrifice—Alll the three fires
were extinguished by glances from the three eyes blazing
with ire; the panio-stricken priests, with the cloth of
their turbans snatched away by the ganas (attendants)
actively moving about, fell down; Daksha began to
praise, while his spouse wept piteously ; and the gods
took to flight. (3)

And again—

‘Triumphant is the Lord of the stars (moon);
reverence to the gods; may tho eminent Brahmanas be
freo from molestation ; may the Earth yield plentiful
corn ; and may the illustrious King (Sri-Harsha), with »
body (lovely) like the moon, shine pro-minently ! (4)

(After the recital of the Nandi).

MANAGER—Enough of prolixity, To-day, on tho
oovasion of the Spring-festival, being called with great
respect by the multitude of kings, dependent on the
otus-like feet of our King, the illustrious Sri-Harsha,
who have come here from regions in the various
quarters, I was thus addrossod—“Our master, Sri-
Harshadeva, has composed a Natiké, entitled Ratnévali,
graced with a novel arrangement of the plot- We
have heard about it from hearsay, but have not
soon it acted. Out of respect, therefore, for that very
King, the gladdoner of the hearts of all people,
and with a mind to favour us, the same should be
enacted on the stage by you with proper acting (or
representation)” Iwill then arrange the tiring-room
now (or, make my toilet) and then do as desired.
(Walking about and looking on). Ah! Iam quite sure,
the minds of all the spectators have been won over
(or, favourably disposed towards us). For,

Sri-Harsha is an eminent poot, and this audience
hore is ever disposed to appreciate merits ; the story of
Vatsardja ts an attractive one in the world, and we are
masters of the histrionic art ; each one of those clroum=



--- Page 167 (OCR) ---
4

Act I. J 3 [ pp. 57,

stances is, even by itself, the source of the attainment
of the desired object; what to say, then, when thore
has come about this combination of all advantage
through the accumulation (greatness) of my luck! (5)

Iwill then go home, call my wife, and begin the
music, (Turning round and looking towards the tiring-
room). This is my house; let me enter. ( Entering),
Lady, (come) here for a while,

(Entering).

THE AOTRESS—Here I am, my dear, Let Your
Honour command what business is to be executed.

MANAGER—Lady, this assembly of kings is
to see the Ratndvalf (represented on the stage);
attire yourself (for it)

AOTRESS—( Heaving a sigh, with dejection)» Dear
husband, you are now free from anxiety; so why
should you not danoo? But I, hapless that I am,
have an only daughter; and oven she has been betroth-
ed by you (to some one) in some distant country.
With (being lost in) the thought as to how her mar-
riage with a bridegroom living in a distant country
could be accomplished, I am not cognizant even of
myself, What of dancing then!

MANAGER—Lady, away with unoasiness as to
(the bridegroom) being at a distant place ; just see—

Fate when propitious brings at once the desired
object, even from a different isle, or from the ocean's
depths, or from the extreme limit of a quarter, and puts
‘one in possession of that. (6)

(Behind the soenes

Well said, son (or, follower) of Bharata, thus it is;
where is the doubt (about that)? (He repeats Propi-
tious fate de. ).

MANAGER—{ Hearing and looking towards the tiring-
‘room, with joy). Lady; here has just come my younger
brother, assuming the character of Yaugandhardyaua:
Come away thon; we become ready for putting on our
costumes, (Breunt: Both)

End of the Prelude, ;

gor
0

Learn,’



--- Page 168 (OCR) ---
pp: 8-9.) 4 [ Act 1.

(Enter Yaugandharayana ).

YAUGA.—So it is; what doubtis there? (He repeats
Propitious fate &c,). Else, where (how incongruous) is
tho finding of a plank by the daughter of the King of
Simhala sought(by me) through confidence in the words
of a Seer, as she rose upafterbeing submerged in the sea
owing to ship-wrock, and where the resoue of her found
in that plight by a merchant of Kausémbt returning from
Sinhala, and her being brought here, through recogni-
tion, as she was distinguished by the gem-necklace!
(With joy). Prosperity attends our master in evory way!
(Reflecting). I too acted very properly in respectfully
delivering her into the hands (entrusting her to the
Keeping) of the Queen, I have also heard that
Babhravya, the Chamberlain, along with Vasubhath
the Minister of the King of Simhsla, having somehow
got to land from the son, has joined Rar anvat, who
has gone to uproot the King of the Koisles. My
master’s purpose, though almost accomplished in this
way, doos not bring mo mental easo: so, painful,
indeed, is the position of a servant. For—

In this undertaking, the source of my master's
advancement, to which a helping hand has thus been
given by fate, there is no doubt as to its success;
this is true: yet, acting of my own accord, I am
quite afraid of my master. (7)

(A mized noise behind the curtains).

YauGa—(Hearing). Ah, since there is swelling, in
front, the noise of the clapping of the hands of the eiti-
zons, sweet on account of the songs, accompanied by the
mellow sounds of the tabors gently beaten, I conjecture
that His Majesty has started for the palace to witness
the merriment of the citizens, heightened by the
Madans Festival. (Looking up). Ah, how now! The
King has ascended the palace! He,

The lord of Vatsa, like tho fower-bowed god
(Madana) in person, as it were, with all talk of Vigraha
(war,—body ) ceased, having Rati (love of the people,
—his wifo), living in the hearts of the people, and one
to whom Vasantaka (his{companion,—Spring), is doar, is



--- Page 169 (OCR) ---
Act 1. J 5 Cpp. 0-12

advancing, eagor to behold his own great festival. (8)

I will then go home and give thought to what

remains of the business to be accomplished. (Zzit),
End of the Vishkambhaka.

(Enter the KING, seated, in a dress suited to the
spring festival, and VIDU'SHAKA ),

KING—( With a look of delight), Friend, Vasantake,

‘VipU'sHAKA—Your commands, sire,

Kinc—

The kingdom ‘has all its enemies entirely
‘vanquished ; the burden ( of government ) is placod on
(entrusted to) a worthy (competent) minister; the
people, with all thefr troubles warded off, are tended
with proper protection; (and further ), Pradyota'
daughter (for my wife), the Vernal season and yourself;—
with all these (advantages to complete my happiness),
let Kama have amplo satisfaction by its name: But
I, on my part, regard the great festival as mine. (9)

‘Vipu.—( With jubilation). O friend, so indeed, it is.
I, however, feel that this groat fostival is neither
yours nor Kama’s; it is of me alone, a Bréhmata, of
whom my dear friend has thus spoken. (Looking on).
But what have we to do with this? Just behold tho
besuty of this great Madana-festival, in which
curiosity is excited by the eftizens (or, gallants), dan-
cing as they are struck by the water from the syringes
aken up, of their own accord, by the amorous wore:
Intoxicated with wine; which is attractive on account
of the openings of the streets resounding with the
sound of the charchari songs (ér, elappings of hands)
deepened by the tabors beaten all round, and which
has rendered the faces of the ton directions yellowish-
red by means of the heaps of pataviisa scattered about.

KING—( Casting a glance all round). Oh, the gaisty
of the citizens has reached Its highest point! For,

By the heaps of sconted powder scattered about,
yellow with saffron-dust and imparting to the day:the
appearance of the dawn, by the glitter of gold ornamexits



--- Page 170 (OCR) ---
#

[Act 1.

‘s thatcauso the heads
to bend low by their weight, this Kauéémbt, which has
all the treasures of the Lord of wealth by its
apparent from the dresses (of the people), and
which seems to have its inhabitants covered with
liquid gold as it were, appears all yellow. (10)

‘Moreover,

In the courtyard which is flooded all over with
the contintous streams of water ejected by the foun-
tains, and whore sport is carried on in the mud caused
by the simultsneous and close treadings, the yon
pavement is reddened by the people with the imprints
Git, plantings) of thetr foot, red with the colour of the
vermilion dropping from the cheeks of the females
(moving about) without restraint, (11)

‘Vin'—{Zooking forth). Let my dear friend enjoy
the sight of the sporting of the courtesans, charming
on account of the hissing-sounds uttered, on their
being struck by the (jots of), water from syringes
discharged by the very expert galitants.

KING~(Marking). Well observed byy you, friend! For,

The multitude of gallants (also, wAgas), with up-
lifted syringes of the form of hoods (syringes lijke hoods)
and dimly seen by the glitter of the jewel-or-gaments
in this gloom caused by the frogrant powder scenttared
about, puts me in mind of the nether world. (12)

Vipu.—(Observing). Ho, here is Madanika coming
just bitherwards, along with Chatalatika, dencing with
gestioulations indicative of spring and with steps
falling unevenly owing to exoited passion.

(Enter the TWO Mars, exhibiting Love-sport and
singing the dvipadt ditty).

Mars—

Now is blowing the South-wind, the loved mos-
senger of the flower-weaponed god, causing many a
mango tree to blossom and slackening the jealous pride
of women. (13)

Maultitudes of young females that have caused the
blossoming of the Bakula and the dvoka treo and that”



--- Page 171 (OCR) ---
Act 1. J 1 Lpp. 14-16.

have been eagerly waiting for the company of their
beloveds, are pining, unable to wait. (14)

Now the month of Madhu first makes the hearts of
persons soft; and then Kama pierces thom with his
flower-arrows that have (thus) found scope. (15)

KING—/Marking closely, with astonishment), Oh, the
excess of passion for sport of the sorvant-girls! For,

Of this intoxicated maid, sporting, regardless of
the breaking of her waist bending under the weight of
hor broasts, the mass of hair, loosened and dishovelled,
is giving up, in pain as it wore, the beauty brought on
by the wreath of flowers; here her two anklets, clinging
to her foot, aro orying, through uneasiness as it were,
with a double force; and this her necklace, tossed
about by the continuous shaking, is, through constraint
1s it were, coaselessly striking her bosom. (16)

‘Vipv'—O friend, I too shall go and honour the
Madano-festival by dancing and singing in their
midst.

KING—~(Smiling), Friend, do s0,

Vinu'—( Rising and dancing between the two ).
Honoured Madaniké, honoured Chatalatiké, teach me
too this charchart.

BoTH—(Laughing). Fool, this is not a charchart.

Vr'pu’.—What, indeed, is this then?

MADA.—This, to be sure, is a duipadi-khanda.

Vin0'—(Joufully). What, are modakas made with
this Khanda (granulated sugar) ?

MADA.—/Laughing). You hapless chap, not at all ;—
it is (a poem that is) reoited-

Vipv'.~( Dejectedly ). Tt in thing to be chanted !
Then I have nothing to do with it To my friend’s
presence I will retire. (Wishes to go).

Bori—(Seizing him by the hand). Come, let us
Vasantaka, where would you go? (They pull himin
many ways ).

ViDv'—( Pulling off his hand, running away and
approacking the KING). Friond, I was made to dande;
no, no; I sped away, after having sported.



--- Page 172 (OCR) ---
pp. 17-18.] 8 [Act 1.

Kinc—Well done!

Ouv’ta—Friend Madaniké, we have, indeed,
sported for a long time. Come, then; let us communt-
cate the queen's message to His Majesty.

‘MApA.—Friend, lot us'do so.

BorH—( Walking forth and approaching} Vietory »
victory to Your Majesty ! Sire, the Queen commands
7 Gesticulating shame at’ this half-uttered ). No, no;
respectfully submits—

KING—/ Smiling, with respect |. Madaniké, ‘com-
mands’ Itself is, indeed, pleasing, especially to-day,
miiehe occasion of Madana’s festival. So pray, tell
what the Queen commands.

‘Vrpu'—Ho, slave's daughter, sayest thou—the
Queen commands!

‘BotH—This is Her Majesty's request—“ To-day,
have to go to the Makaranda garden and offer
worship to (tho image of) tho God of love, placed at
the root of the red Asoka tree. So my husband should
be present there

Kina—( With delight), Friond, surely it should be
said that one festival is followed by another, yet

‘Vipv'—Friend, got up then. There we shall go,
so that, gone there, I, too, a Bréhmana, may get some
present.

KING—Madaniké, go and tell the Queen that I am
just gone to the Makaranda garden.

BoTH—As master commands, (Ezeunt).

KING—Friend, come, let us descend. (Roth gesti-
culate descent from the palace ). Briend, lead the way to
the Makaranda garden.

Vipv.—As Your Honour commands. Come, Your
Honour, come.

( BoTH Walk on).
Vipw'—(Looking in front). Friend, here is the
Makaranda garden. Como then, let us enter. (They
enter).



--- Page 173 (OCR) ---
Act Ie] 9 [pp 18-200

Vipw'—( Looking about with wonder ). Look,
0 friend, look. With a canopy formed by means of the
mass of the pollen from the full-blown blossoms of the
mango trees shaken by the Malaya wind, and gratify~
ing to the ear by the music of the sweet notes of the
cuckoos, mingled with the hums of intoxicated bees,
this Makeranda garden appears, indeed, to be honouring
your visit (by thus preparing to receive you). So
let Your Highness honour it with a look.

K1NG—(Looking all round), Oh, the loveliness of
the Makaranda garden! For, here,

‘Wearing a ruddy appearance by their sprouts that
possess the lustre of shooting corals, displaying the
fun of uttoring unintelligible words by means of the
sweet indistinct hums of the rows of bees, and reeling
ever and anon, with the clusters of their branches wa-
ving as they are struck by the Malaya breeze, theso trees
now appear to be tipsy as it were by their being touched
by the influence of Madhu (the season,—wine). (17)

Moreover,

‘The wine sprinkled in mouthfuls (and collected) at
the root, is as if being scented with the shower of
their flowors by the Bakula tree; the Champaka
flowors smile to-day after a long time, while the
moon-like faces of young females are yet red with the
flush of wine; and hearing the jingle of the anklets
loudly resounding in the act of giving strokes (by
ladies) to the Asoka troes, an imitation of it is begun
as it wore, by swarms of bees with their responsive
songs. (18) :

‘VIDU.—(Listening). O friend, these are not the bees
imitating the sound of anklets; it is the sound itself
of the anklets of the Queen’s attendants.

KING—Friend, you have rightly marked.

(Then enter VA‘SAVADATTA‘, KA'NCHANAMA'LA’,
and SA/GARIKA’ with the materials of worship in her
hands, and attendants according to their status).

Va/SAVADATTA’—Show me the way to the Maka-
randa garden.



--- Page 174 (OCR) ---
Pp. 20-22, ] 10 [ Act 1.

Ka'No#.—This way, this way, mistress.

Va'ss.—( Walking about). O Kafichanams1é, how far
from here is the red-As’oka tree where I have to offer
worship to the God of love ?

KA'NCH.—Quite close at hand, mistress. Does not
‘Your Highness see it? This is, indeod, Your Highness’
favourite Madhavi creeper, lovely by its close-
grown flowers. And this other is the Navaméliké
creeper, believing in the untimely flowering of which
the master has been worrying himself day and night.
Beyond this is just seen the red Adoka, where Your
‘Majesty is to perform the worship,

Va'sa.—Come then, let us go there quickly.
KA’'NOH.—This way, mistross, this way.

(AU walk round).
Ka'NOH.—Mistress, here is the red Aéoka troe,
where Your Majesty is to offer worship.

Va’sA.—Then bring me the materials of worship,

Sa'GaRIKA‘~{ Approaching). Mistress, here is ove!
thing ready.

Va'sa—(Observing, to herself). Ob, tho carcless-
ness of my servants! She will fall within tho view of
him from whose range of sight she has been assidu-
ously kept away. Well, I will say this much:—
(loud), Maid, Sigariké, why have you come here,
Jeaving away the SarikA (canary bird) when all
“difphdants ore entirely oooupied with the Madana-
“festival? So, go you there quickly. Deliver all these

materials of worship into the hands of Kafichanamala.
SA/GARIKA’—As Your Majesty commands. (Doing
accordingly and going a few steps, to herself). I have
delivered Sarika into the hands of Susamgata. Ihave also
1 desire to see this—whothor the Bodiless one (Kéma)
is worshipped here in the same way as in tho female
apartments of my father, or otherwise. So being con-
cealed I shall watch. Until it is time here to offer the
worshipI, too, will gather flowers to worship tho Divine
Ananga himself. (Gesticulates the collecting of flowers),

Va'sa.—Kafichanaméla, place (the image’ of )
Pradyumna at the root of the Asoka.



--- Page 175 (OCR) ---
|
|
}

Act I. j u [pp 22-24.

Ka'Nox.—As mistress commands. (Does as
ordered).

Vivu’—0 friend, as the jingling of the anklets
has ceased, I guess the Queen has arrived at the foot
of the As‘oka,

KING—(Looking on). Rightly ascertained, friend,
Mark the Queen, she who, surely,

Standing by the side of the shark-bannored one
(Kama), appears like his bow-staff, possessing a form
delicate like a flower and a waist attenuated by the
observance of a vow, (19)

Come then; we approach her, (Advancing), Doar
Vasavadatia |
Va'sa.—(Seeing). How now! My husband! Victory,
victory, to my lord! Here isa scat; let my lord sit
down,
(The KING shows that he sits down).

K4’Non—Mistross, let the divine Pradyumna be
worshipped (by you) after having decorated the red
Asoka with finger-applications of saffron made with
your own hand,

V4’8A.—Bring me tho materials of worship.

(KA’NOHANAMA'LA’ brings them; VA'SAVADATTA’
does as requested).

‘KING—My darling,

With your comploxion rendered specially clear
(brighter) by the fresh bath, and with the fringe of your
garment shining beautifully with its red Kusumbha
dye, you, while worshipping the God of love, appear
like a twig grown on a tree, having tender new leaves,
with its form made cleaner by being sprinkled over
with a shower and charming by its shining tints,
agreoable like those of the Kusumbha flowers. (20)

Moreover,

dear one, this As'oka touched by you with your
hand engaged in the worship of Smara (Kama), appears
to have another more delicate sprout, as it were,
sprung (from it). (21) ;



--- Page 176 (OCR) ---
pp. 24-26.] iz [ Act i.

Also,

"This Bodiless god will certainly deplore his bodi-
lossness to-day, since ho has not experienced the joy of
the touch of your hand. (22)

Ka‘NCH—Mistress, the divine Pradyumna is wor-
shipped. Now offer suitable worship to your husband,
‘Va‘sA—Thon bring me the flowers and sandal,

Ka‘Nou.—Mistress, here is everything ready.

(Vasavadatta acts worshiping the KING).

SA'GARIKA'—(With flowers taken). O fie! O fie!

How have tarried long, my heart (thoughts) being
entirely taken up by the greed of flowers! I will then
observe, with my person concealed by this cluster of
the twigs of the Sindhuvdra tree. (Doing so and observ-
ing with wonder). How now! ‘The flower-arrowed god
is accepting worship hero in a visible from. In my
father's house, however, he is worshipped being ropre-
sented in a picture. I, too, just standing here, will
then offer worship to the divine Kama, (Offering the
flowers). My salutation to theo, O flower-armed god!
Mayest thou be of a sight not-unproduetive (of bliss)
unto me now! (With this, owing), Whatever was to be
seen has been seen. Iwill thon go away before any
one notices me. (Walks forth a few steps).

Ka'cu.—Revered Vasantaka, come; you too
‘accept an auspicious prosont now. (Vidd. approaches).

va'sa—(After offering sandal unguent, flowers
and ornaments). Noble one, accept this suspicious
present. (Presents it),

‘yviv'—(Joyfully taking it), My blessing to your
Indyship!

(A Bard sings behind the scenes).

‘Pho Sun having entirely gone to the end of the
sky, with all bis radiant light cast on the setting-
mountain, now at the time of dusk this assemblage of
prinoes, pouring all together into the audience-hall, is
cagerly waiting to pay homage to the feet, that rob
(resemble) the lustre of lotuses, of thee, Udayana, that
givest excessive delight to the eyes, as they would to



--- Page 177 (OCR) ---
Act LJ 13 [ pp. 26-28.

the rays, that deprive the day-lotus of its tints, of the
rising moon, the bringer of a fund of joy to tho
eyes. (23)

SA'GARIKA'—/ Hearing and turning back with joy,
and looking longingly at the KING ). How now! This is
king Udayana, to whom I was betrothed by my father |
(Sighing deeply). 80 my life, although degraded by being
in another's service, has become highly estimable now,
by (my having obtained ) his sight.

Kiva—What! With our mind engrossed by the
festival, oven the lapse of the evening twilight was not
noticed by us. The day has drawn to its close now,
Behold, my Queen,

This Eastern quarter, with her pale aspect,
indicates (the presence of ) the lord of night (moon)
screened by the slopes of the rising-mountain, as a
lovely woman does, by her pale face, that of het
husband dwelling in her heart. (24)

Queen, get up then ; let us enter inside the palace,
( All rise and walk on ).

SA'GARIKA’—Ah, the Queen has started. Well, t,
too, will quickly go then. (Looking longingly at the
KING; with a sigh). O fie, O fie! This person could
not be even seen for a long time by me, a hapless
person! (Exit, gazing at the KING).

Kinc—( Walking about),

Queen, behold !—Surpassed by the lotus of your face
that eclipses the splendour of the moon, the lotuses
suddenly grow pale (i.¢. lose their lustre); and hearing the
songs of the courtesans forming your train, the female
bees are slowly lurking in the interiors of buds, as if
smitten with shame, (25)

(Bxeunt Omnes),

End of Act I, styled ‘Madana’s great festival '

RT?



--- Page 178 (OCR) ---
Kot I
(Enter SUSAMGATA’, with her hand occupied with
tho cage of a starling).

SUSAMGATA’—O fio, O fie! Where has my dear
friend Sagariké. gone, having delivered the starling’s
cage into my hand? Where, then, can I find hor?
(Looking in front), How now! Hore is Nipuntka
coming this very way. I will then inquire of her.

(Then enter NIPUNIKA’)

NrPuNIKa’—(With wonder). Oh, what wonder |
Extraordinary, I think, is the power of a deity! Ihave
indeed got the information regarding the King; so
Twill goand communicate it to the Queen. (Walks
about).

S$UsA.—(Approaching). Friend Nipunika, where
are you going, disregarding me, standing hore, and
passing on like one with a mind distracted with
wonder?

Nip.—Ob, Susamgatd! Friend, you have rightly
guessed. This isthe cause of my wondor, To-day,
it was said, Master would learn the secret formula of
causing an untimely production of flowers, from a
pious man, named S'rikhandadésa, who has come from
Sriparvate, and would make his favourite creeper Nav:
maliké smile with a profusion of flowers; and I was
sont by Her Majesty to ascertain the truth about this
matter. But whither have you set out?

SUSA—To search for my dear friend Sdgarika.

Nrrv.—Friond, I saw your dear friend, Sagariké,
entering the plantain-arbour, as if distracted, carrying
with her a picture-board, a brush and  paint-box. Go
‘thon, you; I too will repair to the prosonce of the Queen,

(Bxeunt Both).
End of the Interlude.
(2nter SWGARIKA’ with a picture-board and brush
in hand and exhibiting love-sickness),
64'GA.—(Heaving a sigh). My heart, take cheor;
take cheer. What is the uso of this persistent yearning



--- Page 179 (OCR) ---
Act HL. J 16 [pp. 31-82.

after a person difficult to obtain, the only result of
which is anguish? Moreover, you wish to see again
the very porson at whoso sight your distross increases ;
s0 woeful is your stupidity! Again, O you exoeed-
ingly erael heart, how don't you blush to follow a
person known to you only after a moment's sight,
forsaking this person brought up with you from birth?
Or, what fs your fault (here)? You have thus acted
to-day, being afraid of the descent of Anaiga’s shafts.
(Tearfully ). Well, { will rebuke Anaiga, (Joining the
hollowed palms). Divine wearer of flower-weapons,
boing one who has conquered all the gods and the
demons, how are you not ashamed to strike at woman-
kind! ( Reflecting). Cr why, you are without a body
(and henoo also feelings). ( Heaving a Long sigh). In fact,
death itsolf has approached me, a luckless person, as
indicated by this evil omen. ( Looking at the picture-
board). Then s0 long as no one comes here, I will gaze
upon that coveted person drawn ina picture and then
do as desired. (Firmly concentrating her mind and
gesticulating the taking up of the picture-board ; with a
sigh). Though on account of extreme nervousness this
my fore-hand trembles very much, still as there is no
other means of seeing that person, I will paint, just as
Tean, and behold him. ( Acts drawing him).
(Enter SUSAMGATA’ ).

SUSA.—This is that plantain-bower. I will enter.
(Hintering and looking in front, wonderingly ). Here
my dear friond SAzarika, But why does she not
look at me, engaged in painting something as though
her heart were overpowered by deep love? All right. In
the meantime, avoiding the range of her eye-sight,
Iwill see what she has been painting. ( With genile
steps standing at her back and seeing, with joy). How
now! She has painted our master! Noble, Sagarika,
noble! Or rather, how can a female royal swan find
pleasure except in a tank full of lotuses

SA’GA—T have drawn him, indeed. But again, my
sight is not able to see him, owing to the water of tests
coasolessly falling down. (Raising her facelanduapiiy



--- Page 180 (OCR) ---
pp. 92-84. J 16 [Act Tr.

Off the tears, then covering the board with her upper
garment on noticing SUSAMGATA’, witha smile). Ab,
my dear friend, Susamgaté! Friend, sit here.

SUSA—(Sitting down and forcibly taking tho board):
0 friend, who is this that is drawn by you here?

84'GA—(Blushingly ). Friend, god Anatiga, now
that the Madana-festival is being celebrated.

SUSA—(Smiling). Ob, your skill] But how is it
then that the picture appears like one that fs solitary ?
80 I, too, will draw, and make ithave Rati by his side.
(Takes the brush and while acting portraying Ratt,
paints Sagariks ).

SA’'GA—(Looking at the picture and with an ai
of fault-finding). Susa™gatt, why have you painted
me here ?

Su8A—(Langhing). Friend, why do you get angry
without cause? As is the God of love painted by you,
sis Rati painted by mo. So, O you perverter of things,
what is the use of your talking in this wise? Tell
me at once the whole story.

SA’0A—{ Flushing to herself). Surely 1 am found
out by my friend. (Zaking Susamgatd by the hand,
aloud). Dear friend, great, indeed, is the shame I feel
So act in such a way that no one will know of this
affair,

SuSA.—Friend, be not ashamed. Such a jewel of a
girl must necessarily have a desiro for such a husband.
Still I shall so manage it that no one will know any-
thing about this matter. But this intelligent starling
‘may be tho cause (of disclosure) in this case. Catching
up the words of this conversation, she might, per-
chance reproduce them before anybody.

84’0A.-What then shall Ido in this matter? My
torment grows yot more, (Gesticulates love-torment).

Suss—(Placing her hand on Ségariha's bosom).
Be composed, friend, be composed. In the meanwhile
Ishall take lotus-loaves and lotus-stalke from this
tank and come back quickly. (Going out and coming
Gack, represents the forming of ated with lotus-leaves



--- Page 181 (OCR) ---
Act I. J 7 [ pp. 94.36.

and the making of bracelets with the stalks and puts
the remaining lotus-leaves on Sigariké’s bosom),
SaGA—Friond, remove these lotus-leaves and
the bracelets of the lotus-stalks. Away with thi
Why do you trouble yourself in vain? Just I say—

Love for a person unattainable, (the sense of)
shame very great, and self under the power of another—
(thus) dear friend, this love is unequal : is not death the
only best refuge then? (or, Death alone is the
refuge). (1)

(Faints).
Susa.—(Pitifully). Friond Sagarika, take he

take heart !

(Behind the scenes),

Dragging under him the remaining part of the
golden chain tied round his neok after it had snapped,
and with the circle of small bells jingling on account
of the wanton movements of the feet, this monkey here,
broken loose from his stable, having crossed the gates,
is ontering the King’s palace, causing fright to the
ladies, with his path followed in hasto and confusion
by the stable-keepers. (2)

Moreover,

Tho ounuchs, casting off shame, not being reckoned
among men, have fled away; this dwarf is entering,
through terror, the inside of the Chamberlain's robo ; the
Kiratas, betaking themselves. to the outskirts of the
harem, have acted in a manner befitting their name ;
and the hunch-backs are slinking off in a low posture,
foaring lost they might be noticed. (3)

Susa.—(Hearing, looking forward, then rising in
haste and taking Sagarika by the hand). Friend, get up-
This wicked monkey is, indeed, making in thls very
direction. Hiding ow unnoticed in the gloom
of the tamdla trees, let us have him pass off. (Doing
accordingly they remain watching).

SA’GA.—Susalpgatt, how have you left behind the
picturo-board? Perchance somebody may s00.ib;



--- Page 182 (OCR) ---
Pp- 96-88. J 18 [Act 11.

SuSA—O you who ate quite at ease, what have
you still to do with the picture-board? Here has the
wicked monkey, fond of rice-and-curds, opened the
cage of the starling and gone away; Medhdvint (or,
the sharp-talented bird) has flown up and is going
away. Come, then; let us quickly follow hor. She
bas caught the words of our conversation and might
utter them before anybody.

SA’GA.—Briend, let us do so, (They walk round).
(Behind the Scenes).

Ab, Ho! Marvellous, marvellous!

Sa'GA.—(Looking forth, with fear), Susamgata,

methinks the wicked monkey is coming up again.

SusA—(Seeing the Vidd., and smiling). Ah, you
timid girl, don’t you fear; this is the noble Vasantaka,
our master’s companion.

Sa’ca—(Looking at him eagerly). Susamgaté,
worthy of sight is this person, indeod !

SusA.—O you careless girl, why tarry to see him?
‘The Sériké, Indeed, is covering a longer distance.
Come away, then ; let us follow her,
(Bxeunt Born),
(Then enters VIDU’. in high glee.

Vinv'—What wonder, Hol How marvellous!
Bravo, O pious S'rtkhandadasa, bravo! For, the very
moment tho desideratum was supplied, the Navamalika,
was so changed that, with its twigs decked with the
thick-grown bunches of flowers, it appears to be laugh-
ing disdainfully, as it were, at the Madhavi creeper
the Queen’s favourite, I will then go and congratulate
E)) my dear friend. (Walking round and looking). Here,
| indeed, is my dear friend coming this very way, with

eyes dilated through joy, and, through confidence

in the dohada, beholding as it were before him the
Navaméliké in blossom, though out of his sight. So
Iwill approach him

(Enter the KING az described),
KING—(Joyfully).

'

iil


--- Page 183 (OCR) ---
Act U1. ] Ww { pp. 88-40»

To-day Ishall certainly make the Queen's face
purple with anger, gazing upon this garden-creeper,
as upon another woman in love, that in a moment
has displayed a profusion of buds (—a powerful long-
ing), has a pale complexion, has its buds opening up
(has commenced to yawn), and has been manifesting
the disturbance (anguish) folt by it (her) by the cess
Jess pufis of wind (—by means of the constant heavings
of sighs). (4)

But Vasantake, gone to learn the tidings about
that, does not come back yet!

‘Viu'—(Entering suddenly). Prosperity, prosperity
to my dear friend! Priond, my congratulations to you!
(He repeats—The very moment the desideratum was
supplied ée.).

KING—What doubt isthere, friend? Incomprehen-
sible is tho potency of goms, charms and herbs.
Behold—

The enemies of Lord Vishnu vanished, when in a
battle they saw the gem (Kaustabha) on his neck; the
serpents live in the nether region, humbled by the
power of charms; and in the days of yore the hero
Lakshmans, and the monkey-warriors that wore struck
down by Meghandda (Indrajit), were restored to life
when they inhaled the odour of the great herb, the
ropository of potent virtue. (5)

Show mo the way then, that I too may enjoy the
fruit of my eyes by looking at it.

Vipv'—(With digni’y). ‘This way, Your Highness.

‘KING—Lead the way,

(BOTH walk with pride).

Vipv'—( Hearing, turning back in fright, and taking
hold of the KING, in agitation). O friend, come, let us
run away,

KING—What for?

‘Vipv’—Some ghost lives in this Zakuln tres.

KING—Fie upon you, fool ! Go fearlessly. Whence
can there be the possibility of such existing hete'?



--- Page 184 (OCR) ---
pp: 40-41. J 20 { Act It,

Vipv'—Oh, here he is, speaking in distinct terms:
Lf you do not believe in what I say, then step in front
and liston yourself.

K1xe—(Doing 80 and hearing).

Sinoe this (speech) has its syllables distinct, and
is swoot as is natural from a fomalo, and as it is not
resonant owing to the smallness of body, (so) I think it
is a Sariké that is speaking. (6)

(Looking up and observing carefully). How now!
It is a Sartka,

Vinv'.—(Looking up). Ah, strange! It is really
a Sérika! (Angrily raising his staf’). Ha, you slave's
daughter! Did you think that Vasantaka really feared
(you)? Wait a moment; so that, striking you with this
ataff, which is as crooked as a wicked man's heart, I
will knook you down from this Bakula treo like a ripe
Kapittha fruit. ( Prepares to strike ).

K1xa—{ Preventing him). Fool, she is saying
‘something pleasant ; why do you trouble her then? Let
us just listen,

( Both listen ),

Vipu'.—( Having listened). O friend, did you hear
what was said by her? She says—“Friond, who is this
that is drawn by you here? Friend, God Ansiiga, now
that the Madana festival is being celebrated". She
again says—" Friend, why have you painted me hore?
Friend, why do you get angry without cause? As is
the God of love painted by you, so is Rati psinted by
me. So, O you perverter of things, what is the use of
your talking in this wise? Tell me at once the whole
story I" O friend, what can this be?

KING—Friend, I conjecture thus—By some one
her heart's darling was printed through love, and
concealed before her friend under the guise of ( being
passed off as) the God of love; and that she too was
drawn there by her friend, having cleverly guessed
the truth.

Vipu'—( With a fillip ). Friend, it is reasonable ;
it must be so,



--- Page 185 (OCR) ---
Act Ii. J a [ pp. 41-43,

KING—Friend, keep quiet, she speaks again.

VIDU'—Oh, she says—"Friond, be not ashamed.
Such a jewel of a girl must necessarily have a desire
for such a husband.” 0 friond, she who is drawn hore
must be a maiden worth looking at.

KING—If so, let us listen attentively; there is
scope for our curiosity here. (They both listen),

ViDu'—"Friend, remove these lotus-leaves and
the bracelets of tho lotus-stalks. Away with those;
why do you trouble yourself in vain?"

KING—Friend, I heard and knew its import also,

Vipv'—Friend, do not boast of your skill at inter-
pretation. Twill explain everything to you having
heard it from her mouth. Let us hear. This Sarika,
the slave's daughter, yet continues to jabber.

KING—Woll sald! (They listen again).

ViDU'—O friend, this rascally Sarika has now
bogun to chant Riks, like a Brihmana knowing the
four Vedas.

KiNa—Friend, tell mo; with my mind engaged
somewhere else, I did not comprehend what she said

VIDU'.—Oh, she says this—Love for a person &e
(See Soka 1). (7)

Krva—(Smiling), Ah! Excepting tho great Bréb-
mana Vasantaka, who else oan know (recognize) such
Riks?

Vipv'.—Then, what isthis ?

KINo—Why, it is a Géthé!

Vipv’.—What do you say? A Gathé?

KING—This is spoken by some one, in excellent
youth, despairing of life, not having obtained her
beloved.

Vipu'—(Laughing loudly). Why adopt ‘these
oiroumlocutory speeches! Why don’t you say straight
not having obtained me. Who else could be conovaled
under the guise of the flower-weaponed god?
his hands, and laughs loudly). ’



--- Page 186 (OCR) ---
pp» 48-45. J 22 { Act 11.
Kino—(Looking up/. ie, blockhead! Why have
you frightened her by laughing loudly, so that having
flown up she has gone somewhere else.
(BotH Look for her).

‘Vipv.—(Observing). Ob, she has surely gone to the
plantain-arbour; come then, let us quickly follow her.

Kinc—

‘That which is said before her friends by a love-
stricken maiden, suffering irresistible love-tormont,
the same, repeated by children, parrots and starlings,
(unexpectedly) comes within the hearing of fortunate
persons only. (8)

‘Vipu'—Come, come, Your Honour, (They walk
round).

‘Vpu'—Oh, here is the plantain-arbour, Let us
enter. (Both enter).

Vipv’—Oh! That slave-gitl has gone away. Let
us rest here for a while, sitting on this stone-slab, cool
by the plantain-leaves waved by a gentle broezo,

KINO—As my friend likes. (BOTH sit down),

KINo—(Sighing, repeate—That which is said &e
(S'loka 8).

‘vipu'.—(Looking sideways). Oh! This must be the
Sériké's cage, with its door thrown open, And thi
too, is that picture-board. I will take it up. (Taking
the board and observing with joy). friend, fortune
favours you!

KING—/ With curiosity). Friend, what do you mean
by this?

Vipu’—Oh, this is what was sald by me—You
yourself are delineated here; who else can be concealed
under the guise of the flower-weaponed god?

KING—(Joyfully streching forth his hands). Show
It, friend, show it,

VipU.—I will not show you, That maiden, too, is
delineated here, What then? Can such a gemofa

girl be shown without a reward?



--- Page 187 (OCR) ---
Act II. J 23 ( pp. 45-47.

Kine—(Forcibly taking the board while offering
his bracelet, and seeing, with wonder).

Who is this, committed to painting, outshining
Lakshmi by her grace and declaring her great love for
me, that enters (captivates) my heart, as a femalo
royal swan enters tho Manasa (lake), agitating the
lotuses in her sportive movement nd indicating to us
the great flappings of her wings? (9)

Moreover,

Having formed the unique full moon of her face, the
Creator must have surely become ill-placed en account
of the closing-up of the lotus forming his seat. (10)

(Enter Sagariké and Susamgata).

SusA.—Friend, we have not secured the Sariks,
Let us at least take the picture-board from this
plantain-bower and return quickly.

SA’Ga.—Frriend, let us do so.

(Both move about).
vipu’—Friond, why has this ono been painted
with her face hung down?

Susa.—(Hearing), Friend, since Vasantaka is
speaking, I think Master also must be here, So we
shall watch, hidden by the cluster of the plantain
trees.

(Both took on).

KING—Friend, look, look here. (He repeats—
Having formed the unique moon &c.

SuSA.—Friend, fortune smiles upon you. Here is
your heart's darling gazing upon you (your picture).

S4'GA.—(Bashfully), Friend, why do you lower this
personage on account of your jooular disposition ?

Vipu'—{Shaking the KING). Here, I say, why has
she been drawn with her face hung down ?

KING—Why, all has boon told by the Sériké
horselfs

Suss.——Priend, Medhavint has shown her power of
remembrance.



--- Page 188 (OCR) ---
pp. 47-48. ] 4 [ Act II

‘Vipv'—O friend, doos your eye feel delighted ?

8a'GA—( With trepidation, to herself). Thinking as
to what he will say now, I really stand between life
and death.

‘KinG—Need it be said that it does? See—

‘My sight, having travelled beyond her pair of
thighs with great difficulty and wandered for a long
time over hor expansive hips, remained fixed on her
middie, uneven with the three waverlike folds; and
now having eagerly (lit. as if it were thirsty) mounted
hor lofty breasts, it has been wistfully looking again
and again at her eyes shedding drops of tears. <1)

SUSA.—Friend, have you heard ?

8a’GA—(Laughing). Hear yourself, whose know -
ledge of (skill at) delineation is thus lauded.

Vinu’—0 friend, whatis this disregard of oven your
own self, union with whom oven such (beauties) highly
esteem, that you do not notice your own self painted
by her just here?

K1no—/ Closely examining). Friond, truly 1
regard myself as highly honoured, inasmuch as I
have been drawn by her: how shall I not see myself
then? See—

‘This cluster of the particles of her teardrops,
fallon as she was dolineating me, looks like the
appearance of perspiration on my person caused by the
touch of her palm. (12)

84’GA.—( To herself ). Choor up my heart, do cheer
up! Even your desire could not have reached such &
height.

§usA.—Friond, you alone are worthy of praise
by whom even Master is made to speak thus.

Vipw',—(Looking to his side), Friend, here is soen
1 bed made of juley lotus leaves and shoots, indicative
of the love-sioknoss of that very girl.

~ KING—Oleverly marked, friend | For,



--- Page 189 (OCR) ---
——_—_—_—_—_—_—_—

‘Act I. ] 25 C pp. 48-51.

This bed of lotus-leaves, withered on both sides
owing to the contact of her stout breasts and hips, green
(in the middle), not having como in close touch with her
slender waist, and with its arrangement disordered by
the tossings and turnings of her drooping creeper-like
arms, tells of tho torment of the slim-bodied one. (13)

Again—

This large lotus-leaf, that bad lain on her boson,
does not, by its two circular parts parched by excess-
ive heat, so much indicate her inward love-aff.ction,
as it does the expanse of her two breasts. (J4)

Vipu'—( Acting the picking up of Lotus-shoots),
friend, hore is another thing, a string of tender lotus.
stalks fading on account of the heat of her plump
breasts.

KING~( Taking it and placing it on his chest )
Insentient by nature that you are, why do you, O
garland of lotus-stalks, undergo pining, being dis-
lodged from between her hugo breasts? There is no
room there even for a slondor fibre of thine; how could
there be any for you then? (15)

SU8—( Zo herself). Oh, fie, fe! With his heart
tossed about by violent love, Master has begun to speak
incoherently even; so it won't be proper to remain
indifferent any more, Well, I shall do this. ( Aloud),
Friend, here is before you what you came here for.

S4'GA—{ Chidingly ). For whom did I come here?

Sus.—( Laughing). O you apprehender of some-
thing else, I say, for the picture-board ; take it then,

Sa’CA.—(Angrily). Lam not clever enough to under.
stand such (enigmatical) spseches of yours. I will,
therefore, go elsewhere. ( Wishes to go).

SU8—( Seizing Sdgariké by the hand). You im-
patient (or, irasoible ) girl, wait here for a short while
till Teome back, having taken the picture-board from

the plantain-bower, ©
Sa‘Ga.—Friend, do so. *
(Sussgata walks tovords the plantain-Lower/)
Paes)



--- Page 190 (OCR) ---
pp. 51-62. ] 26 [Act Ir

Vipv'—(Seeing Susagata, in confusion). O friend:
hide the picture-board. Here is the Queen's maid
servant, Susa™gata, coming.

( The King covers the board with the
end of his garment ).

Sus—( Advancing). Victory, vietory to Your
iy!
KING—Welcome, Susamgatd. Sit down here,

( Susaingata sits down ).

KING—Susamgata, how did you know that I was
here?

Sus.—/ Smiling }. Sire, not only Your Highness,
but the whole affair, together with the picture-board,
has beon known by me; so I will go and inform the
Queen accordingly.

Vipv'—( Aside; with alarm). O friend, everything
in possible; this born-slave is a great tattler. So
please ber with a presen:

KinG—Properly said by you. (Taking SUSAMGATA
by the hand). Susaigata, this is merely joke; you
should not annoy the Quoon for nothing. Here is
a reward for you! (Offers her the ear-ornament ).

SU8—/ Bowing, with a smite ).

Sire, away with fear. (Emboldened) by Your Maj-
esty’s favour, I, too, played a joke. So where is the
need for the ear-ornament ? This will be a high favour
on me—My friend Sagariké is angry with me, saying—
Why am I painted here on this picture-board? So my
lord should go there and appease her,

KING—( Rising in haste), Where is she, where is
sho?

SUS8—This way, this way, Your Majesty,

‘ViDU'—Oh, I shall take this picture-board with me.
Tt way, perchance, be of use again,

BUS.—Stre, here she is !

(All ianuc forth from the plantain-Lower ),



--- Page 191 (OCR) ---
Act IL. J a7 C pp. 82-54.

SA'GA.—( Seeing the King, with joy accompanied by
nervousness and tremor, to herself). Alas, pity! On
seaing him I am not able to move forward single
step through excessive agitation. What, then, shall
I do now ( dit. in this ons ”

VIDU.—~{ On seeing SA’GARIKA’ ). Ob, bless mei
What wonder! Such grace of form is not to be seen in
‘the world of mortals! Methinks even the Oreator
must have been struck with wonder on oreating it.

KInc—Friend, I, too, have this in my mind—

Surely, by the Creator, overpowered by wonder at
having created this beauty, the ornament of the thre:
worlds, bis eyes, surpassing in beauty the petals of hie
own lotus, were extended the more ; the exclamations—
‘Excellent,’ ‘Excellent’—must have been uttered simul-
taneously with all the four mouths, and the heads
nodded (in satisfaction ), (16)

Sa’GA—/ Looking reprovingly at Susatgata’)
Such is the picture-board you have brought! (Goes).

Krwo—

Though you cast this glance (eyes) in anger, O
passionate one, yet, it being naturally affectionate,
will not assume harshness; go, giving up haste; your
heavy hips will cause pain to you by the stumblings
of your feet. (17)

‘SUS.—Master, this one is, indeed, greatly irascible:
‘80 pacify her by taking her by the hand.

KING—/( With joy). As your ladyship says, (Take
Sagarika by the hand and gesticulates the pleasure of
touch).

ViDU’—Oh, this, indeed, is Sri, in a new form,
thet you have obtained,

KiNG—Friend, it is true,

This is S’rt, and her arm too is the shoot of the
Parijata; how else exudes this flow of ambrosia in the
guise of perspiration? (18)

‘$08—You are oxtromoly hard-hearted, dear, si
you do not give up your anger though thus held by
the hand by His Majesty.



--- Page 192 (OCR) ---
Pp. 54-66. ] 28 [ Act 11.

Sa'GA—( Knitting her eyebrows). Ah, Susamgaté,
you do not still desist !

KING—Be pleased, dear; such persistence of anger
towards a friend is, indeed, not proper.

Vipu'—This is, indeed, another queen, Vésa-
vadatta (—Here is another, Queon Vasavadatta/

(The KING lets go S4'GARIKA"S hand in fright)

Sa'GA.—( In flurry ). Susa™gata’, what shall 1 do
now?

SUS—Friond, hidden by this avenue of the tamala
trees, we shall depart, (Ezeunt).

KING—/( Looking towards the sides). Friend, where
is that Queen Vasavatdatia?

‘Vipv'—Oh! I do not know whore she is. I said
she (Saga) was another queen Va’savadatta, owing
to her cherishing anger for a long time.

Krxo—Fie upon you, fool!

‘That my beloved, somehow found by good luck,
like a necklace of gems, with Raga ( love,—brilliauey )
manifest, was made to fall off from my hand by you,
‘even before she war taken to tho neck (sho was
embraced,—it was placed round). (19)

(Then enter Va’savadatta’ and KéfichanamAla’).

Va'sav.—Maid Kafichanamdla, how far yet is
that Navamaliké recived into his favour by my
husband ?

KA’Non.—Mistress, it is, indeed, seon beyond this
Banian-bower.

Va'sa.—Then lead the way.

Ka'xcr.—ehis way, this way, Mistross.

Kix—Friend, where can I see my beloved?

Ka'xon.—Mistress, as Master is talking near at
hand, I think he has been waiting for Your Highnes:
80 let my mistress approach.

Va'sava—/Advaneing). Prosperity, prosperity, to
my husband

KrNc—(Aside). Friend, conoe:

the picture-board.


--- Page 193 (OCR) ---
Act I. J 29 [ pp. 56-87.

(Vidu'shaka places the board under his arm-pit and
conceals it with his upper garment,

Va'savVA—My lord, has the Navamélika
blossomed ?

KING—My Queen, though we came here first, wo
did not see it, as you delayed. Come, then; let us seo
it together.

Va'sava.— ( Marking closely ). My husband, from
the very expression of your face I have known that
the NavamAliké tas flowered. So I will not go
now |

Vipv'.—Hallo! Ho! We have won!

(Stretches forth his hans and dances; while dancing
the board falls down from his arm-pit), .

KING—(Aside; threatens VIDU'. with the finger).

Vipu'.—(Aside), Ho! Donot be angry ; sit quiet.
I will soe to that

Ka’non.—( Taking up the board, ‘eyeing it, aside).
Mistress, just mark what is drawn here on the picture
board,

Va'savA.—/Marking it, aside). Kafichanamala, this
is my husband; and this again is Sagariké. What can
this be?

‘My mistress, I too was thinking of the

Va’sava—(With an angry smile), My husband,
who has drawn this ?

Kinc—( With a smile of embarrassment ; aside ):
Friend, what shall I say ?

‘Vipv'—{ Aside), Ob, do not be anxious; I will
give a reply. (Aloud, to Va’savadatta’ ), Madam, do
not think it otherwise. On hearing my remark that
one's own self {s painted with difficulty, my friend
thus displayed his skill in drawing,

KING—It is just as Vasantaka has stated,



--- Page 194 (OCR) ---
pp. 67-59. ] 80 [ Act I.

Va'sava.—( Pointing at the board). My husk
and this other one that is drawn near you—is that tho
noble Vasantaka’s skill ?

KING—/Smiling). Enough of misunderstanding, my
Queen. Thi me girl, drawn after boing conceived
by my own imagination, but never seun before.

‘Vipv.—My lady, this is true; quite true! I swear
by my sacred thread, if one like this was ever seen by
us before!

KA'NOH.—( Aside), Mistress, such acoldental resom-
blance is sometimes quite possible.

‘Va'sava—/ Aside), Your simpleton, this is, indeod
Vasantaka ; you do not understand his prevarications,
(Aloud ). My lord, I for myself have got headache
while looking steadfastly at the board. So I will go.
(Departs).

KING—{ Taking her by the skirt of her garment ).

Queen, should I say—' Bo pacified,’ it would not
suit, as there is no anger (displayed); to say that I
shall not do s0 again would be an admission (of «
fault ); if T say ‘there is no fault on my part,’ you will
know it to be false; so, dearest, I do not know what
would be proper to say in this case. (20)

‘Va‘sava.—( Respectfully pulling off the skirt of her
germent), My dear, do not take itotherwise. Headache
has beon really troubling me; so will. depart, (Ezeunt
Bors).

‘Vipv'—(Looking about himself). Oh, fortune favours
you! The untimely hurricane has passed, leaving us
unhermed |

KING—Nonsenso, blookhoad! A way with gratifica-
tion! The Queen's persistent anger, concealed by her,
when passing, through high-breeding, was not marked
by you.

Through powor of self-control, though there was
sudden knitting of the eyebrows, the face was hung
down very low; she directed a gentle piercing
smile at me, but no harsh words were uttered; the



--- Page 195 (OCR) ---
Act IT. ] 31 [pp. 59-81,

eyes, though rendered dull by the tears gathered
within, were not opened wide; (thus) by my darling,
anger was manifested and yet propriety was not given
up (discarded). (21)

Come, then, let us go to propitiste the Queen
herself. (Exeunt omnes).

End of Act IT,
Styled * The Plantain-Bower."

ACT II.
( Enter MapantEa’ ),

MADANIKA'—/ In the air), Kanéambiks, 0 Kau-
tambika, did you see Kafichanamalé with Master or
not? (Listening). What say you? Sho came and went
away along time since? Well, where then oan I find
her? ( Looking in front). How now! Here is
KAfichanamala, coming this vory way. I will thon
approach her.

( Then enter Ka’nchanama'ls’ ),

Ka'ncu.—~{ Sareastically ). Bravo, minister Vasan-
take, bravo! By this your attention to (planning of )
union and discord you have surpasssed even His
Exoellenoy Yaugandharayana.

Mava.—{ Approaching, with a smile). Dear Kas-
chanamala, what is done by the noble Vassntake,
that he is thus oxtolled?
riend Madanika, what are you to
is question? You will not be able

gain by asking #)
to keop the secret.

MaDA.—I swear by the feet of the Queen, if
I disclose it before any one,

Ka‘NOH.—If so, then listen. To-day while
coming back from the royal palace, I overheard
Vasantaka’s conversation with Susamgata,

MaDAa.—( With curiosity). Priend, of what sort?

Ka'NoH.—Thus—“Susagamta, excepting Sagarika
there is no other cause of my friend’s indisposition;
think out, therefore, some remedy for this.”



--- Page 196 (OCR) ---
pp. 61-63, ] 32 ( Act III.

MapA.—What did Susamgata say to that ?
Ka'non.—This was said by her-“To-day, indeed, Z
shall take Sagarika with me, apparelled as the Mistress
with the dress which was presented tome by the Queen,
as she placed Sagarika under my charge, her suspicion
being roused by the incident of the picture-board; and
myself, dressed as Kéfichanamala, will come here at
dusk, You too shall wait for mo just hore, at the
entrance to the picture-hall. Then the meeting of
Master with her will take place in the Madhavi bower.”
MaDA.—(Angrily). Susatgaté, condemned are you
that thus deceive the Queen, who is indeed, so kind to
her attendants!
KA'NoH.—Friend, whither have you set out now?
MADA.—I was sont to look for you by the Queen,
getting anxious as you delayed, having gone to learn
the tidings about the well-being of Master, who was
bodily indisposed,

KA'NCH.—Very simple-minded now must be the
Queen if she has such a belief! Here is Master sitting in
the balcony with the Ivory-gate, concealing his love-
slokness under the guise of indisposition. Come, then,
let us communicate this news to our mistress.

( Ezeunt Both ).
( End of Praves‘ake ).

(Then enter the KING seated, gesticulating love-
sickness

KING—(Sighing).

Endure now, my heart, the fever caused by the
fire of love; it cannot at all be allayed: why do you
then pine for her in vain? Since by me, a fool that
I was, her hand which was then somehow obtained and
the touch of which was like that of thick sandal-paste,
was riot seized and put on you fora long time. (1)

Ob, a great wonder!

Mind by nature is unsteady and difficult tobe hit;
and yet how is {t that the same of me has been equally
pierced with all his arrows by Kama? (2)



--- Page 197 (OCR) ---
Act LIL. J 33 [ pp. 68-65.

(Looking heavenwards). 0 god of flowery bow!

The arrows of the mind-born god are fixed as five ;
and of them thousands of men, mostly of my type, form
the mark;—this, that has got currency in the world, is
now seen to bo the reverse in your case; for this body
of lovers, pierced with innumerable arrows and holp-
loss, has been reduced to the state of five (i.e. death). (3)

(Reflecting). 1 do not so much think of myself,
reduced to a state of this sort, as of that poor Sagariké,
come within the range of the sight of the Queen,
Whose vehemence of anger was suppressed within. For,

She turns away her face from all, feeling that
she is known; seoing two persons conversing, she
considers the talk as relating to herself ; and when her
companions smile, she manifests the greater confusion:
thus my beloved is mostly disconsolate, owing to
anxiety cherished at heart. (4)

How does Vasantaka, sent to learn the news about,
her, dolay ?

(Then enter Vasantaka in high spirits).

Vipu'.—(With satisfaction). Ho, ho! Such entire
satisfaction was not felt by my dear friend even on the
acquisition of the kingdom of Kaus’émbt as I think ho
will feel to-day on hearing-the agreeable news from me.
I will then go my dear friend end communicate it to
him. (Watking round and looking). How now! This my
dear friend is sitting, looking in this very direction;
so I think he is waiting just forme. I will, then,
approach him, (Advancing), Victory, victory, to my
dear friend! O friend, T congratulate you on the more-
than-expected success of your business.

K1xG—{ With joy). Friend, ts my darling all safe?

Vipv'.—(With pride). Oh, before long you will
know it on seeing her yourself!

KinG—(With satisfaction), Friend, will there be
also a meeting with my beloved ?

Vipu’—(With self-conceit). Why should there not
be, when I, who laugh at the intellectual powers even
of Brihaspati, am your counsellor ?



--- Page 198 (OCR) ---
pp. 65-67. ] 34 [ Act In.

KING—(Smiting). Not at all strange! What is not
possible in your case? So tell it; I wish to hear in
detail,

Vipu’—( Whispers in the ear), Thus, thus.

KING—( With joy’. Bravo, friend, bravo! Here is
your reward! ( Taking off a bracelet from his hand,
present it ).

‘VIDU'—( Putting on the bracelet and looking at him-
self). Ob, Iwill go and show my wife this my hand
decked with the bracelot of pure gold,

Kinc—{ Restraining him by holding his hand)
Friend, you will show it afterwards. First ascertain
how much of the day now remain

Vipu'—( Observing ). Mark, Oh, mark! The Lord
of thousand rays (Sun), having as it were an appoint
ment made to him by his bride, tho eve, is proceeding,
with his heart swayed by deop love, towards = wood
on the top of the Setting Mountain,

‘Kie—( Marking, with delight ). Well ob
friend! The day has drawn to its close. For,

With a heavy load of anxiety laid on his mind, at
the thought that his one-wheeled car will not be able
to come up again in the morning after having
traversed the road ( distance ), long on account of the
cirouit of the world, this Sun, stationed on the Setting
Mountain, has drawn off and is carrying away, as it
were, the wheel of the directions, the array of the
golden spokes of which is clearly seen in the form of
the cirele of the remnants of his own rays swallowed
up by dusk. (5)

‘Moreover,

“Tam gone, O lotus-eyed one; this is my time (to
gone to sleep you are to be roused by me
“Thus does this Sun, with his rays focussed
on the peak of the Setting Mountain (his hands placed
on her drooping head), offer consolation to the
lotus-plant. (6)

So get up; let us go to the very Madhavi creeper
and await the time of the appointment of the dearest



--- Page 199 (OCR) ---
Act LIL. 85 [ pp. 67-69.

Vipu'—Oh, well spoken! ( Both rise ).

ViDv'—(Observing). O friend, mark! mark! This
mass of darkness that has extended (so as to appear
conneoted—thickened) the thinly spread rows of woods,
end has the dark hue of the stout wild boars and bisons
covered with deep mud, is moving onwards, covering
up the eastern direction,

EING—(Looking about), Friend, well observed; for,

This mass of darkness that steals (possesses)
the hue of Siva’s neck first envelops the oast and then
the other quarters also; advancing, it obscures in
succession mountains, trees and the different parts of
the town ; thereafter, acquiring thicknoss, it deprives
the fruit (use) of eyes. (7)

Show mo the way, then,

VIDU'—This, way come this way, dear friend.
( They walk round ),

VIDU'.—( Observing carefully). Friend, here at hand
is the Makaranda garden, having, as it wore, darkness
rolled into a mass in it, on account of the trees and
creepers, with their thick foliage closely interwoven.
How, then, can the way be noticed hore ?

KING—~{ Smelling the fragrance). Friend, go ahead;
the path here is surely very well known. For,

This is cortainly the row of the Champake t
this is that beautiful Sinduvara; so also here is the
dense avenue of the Bakula trees; and this is the line
of Pétala plants : Thus in'this garden the path, though
darkness, becomes
t by means of the signs of trees (as they
become) revealed by sovorally inhaling their varied
odour: (8)

( They walk on ).

‘Vipv'.—Oh, here we have arrived at the bower of
the Madhavt oreepers, to which the infatuated beos aré
flocking, which has scented the ton directions with ité
highly gratifying fragrance, and which is indicated
by the ease experienced-by the foct as they tread
on the pavement of the polished omerald-tlabs,'Your



--- Page 200 (OCR) ---
pp: 69-71. 36 [ Act III.

Honour then should wait just here, while I come
back quickly. taking with me Sdgariké wearing the
apparel of the Queen.

KiNG—Friend, make haste, then, make haste!

vipv'.—Oh, go not be impatient, Here I come
back. (Zzit)

KING—In the meantime I too shall sit on the dais
formed of the emerald-slabs, and await the time of my
darling’s appointment. (Sitting down and musing). Ch,
strange is the predilection for his new love of an
amorous person, disregarding union with his own wife,
For,

Full of fear she does not cast a glance bright with
love on (her lover's) face; ** * and though held with
offort, she repeatedly says that she would go away; and
yet an amorous girl that has been present at the
rendezvous delights all more. (9)

‘Ah, how doe; Vasantake tarry! What then? Has
the matter been known by the Queen ?

(Then enter Va'savadatta’ and Ka’nchanama'la’)

Va‘saVA—Kéfichanaméla, is Sdgariké really going
to meet my husband, in my dress ?

Ka'NoH.—How can Mistress be informed falsely?
Or why, Vasantake himself, waiting at the door of the
picture-hall, will carry conviction to Your Highness.

Va‘sava.—Thither then do we go.

Ka‘NcH.—Come, come, my mistress. (Both walk
forth).

(Enter Vasantaka covered with a veil

Vipv.—{ Listening attentively ). Since the sound of
foot-steps is heard at tho door of the pioture-hall,
T think Sagariké has come.

KA'NoH.—Mistress, this is the picture-hall. I
will then make sign to Vasantaka, (-Snaps her
Anger ):

Vipu'—- Joyfully approaching, with a smile).

|! usatgatd; you have very well put on Kafichanamsla's
disguise. Now, where is Sagarika ?



--- Page 201 (OCR) ---
Act II. j 37 { pp. 1-72.

KA'NCH—(Pointing with the finger). Why, this
here!

ViDu.—(Looking with wonder). This is evidently
Queen Vasavadatté herself,

Va'sava.—{ With apprehension ; to her:
am I known?

VibU'— (Snaps his fingers). Lady Sigariké, como
this way. (Va'savaparra’ smiles and looks at
Ka/NCHANAMA’LA’ ).

Ka'NCHA.—( Aside, threatening with her finger).
Cursed one, you will have to remember these words of
thine!

ViDU'—Haston, lot Sagarika hasten. —Here, indeed,
is rising from the eastern quarter, the divine moon,
(Walks about),

KING—Why doos my mind feel such ardent
longing when union with my beloved is at hand? Or
rather,

). What,

Tho fierce heat of love does not cause so much
burning at the beginning, as does when ( its object,
is) near; in the rainy season, the day oppresses the
most when a downpour of water is at hand. (10)

‘VIDU'.—( Directing his ear ). Lady Sagarika, here
my dear friend speaking in a manner full of anxious
thoughts with re! mee to your own self. I will,
therefore, inform him of your arrival.

VA'SAVA.—{ Vode assent}.

VIDU'.—~{ Approuching the KING ), Vriend, fortune
smiles upon you! Here, indood, have I brought
Sfgarika!

KING—/( Rising hastily, in joy ). Briend, where is
she? Oh, where?

Vipv.—Why, here!

KiInG—( Approaching). My darling, Sagarika,

Your face is the moon; your oyes are (but) two
(blue) lotuses; your hands imitate the day-lotuses ;
your pair of thighs are like plantain-stocks; and
your arms bear rogemblanos to lotus-shoots; O you

nad



--- Page 202 (OCR) ---
pp. 72-74. 3s [ Act 111.

all of whose limbs are thus delight-giving, come,
come, and having quickly and without hesitation
embraced me, soothe my limbs languid on account of
the fever of love. (11)

Va'sava.—(With tears, aside). O Kafichanamala,
my husband, having uttered such words, will again
address me,—this, Oh, is a wonder

Ka’NOHA.{ Aside ). Mistress, it is certainly so,
But what cannot be expected from advanturous men?

Vipu’—Lady Sagariké, be quite easy of mind and
talk with my dear friond. Even now his ears are
grated with the harsh words of the ever-irate Queen
Vasavadatté ; let the sweet cadence of your words
regale them now.

Va'sava.—( Aside, angrily ). 0 Kanchanamal
thus harsh-tongued ; worthy Vasantaka, again, is a
sweet-speaker !

KA/NoHA.—( Aide ). Oursed one, you will have to
remember these words!

Vipu.'—{ Observing). Friend, look, look! Here has
risen the divine moon, lighting up the east and look-
ing (reddish) like the cheek of an angry woman.

KING—Dear Sagarika, behold—

‘Tho lord of the night, with the all-in-all of iris bril-
liance robbed by your face, having ascended the
mountain's peak, now stands confronting you, with)
hands (rays) stretched up, as ifto retaliate. (12)

Again, by him, rising, his natural dull-hendedness|
isshown. For,

Does not the moon of your face cause to fadel
(colipse) the beauty of the lotus; does it not bring
delight to the eyes ; or does it not by its mere appear
ance cause the fish-bannered ( god of love,—tho sea) t6)

swoll ;—that, notwithstanding its presence, this othe

moon has risen? If there be pride on account of ( th

presence of) nectar, that too is hore in the Bimba-liki

lower lip. (13)



--- Page 203 (OCR) ---
Act III, J 39 [pp. 15-76.

Va'sava.—( Casting off the veil, angrily ). My hus-
band, truly I am Sagariké! But you, with your
heart entirely taken up by Sigariké, soe evorything
as consisting of Sagarika!

KING—( With confusion, aside). Flow now! This
is Queen Vasavadatté! Friend, what means this?

Vipu'—( With despair ), What else, friend? Our
life is jeopardized!

KING—( Sitting down and joining the hollowed
palms ). Dear Vasavadatta, be pleased, be pleased.

Va'sava.—( Turning towards him and stretehing
forth her hands, with suppressed tears ). My husband,
say not so; these words are transforred to another.

ViU'—(To himself). What shall I do in this case?
Well, I shall say this.—/ Aloud ). Madam, you are
magnanimous, indeed. So let this one fault of my
dear friend be forgiven.

Va‘saVA.—Noble Vasantaka, rather I myself have

been guilty towards him, interposing an obstacle in
his first meeting !

KING—Queen, with my offence thus clearly seen,
what shall I say? Still I submit—

Here shall J, full of shame, O Queen, wipe off with
my head the reddish tint of your fect caused by red
lac; but that caused by the oclipse-like anger on the
moon of your face I shall be able to remove only if
compassion be shown to me, (14)

( Falls at her feet ).

Va'sAVA.—( Preventing him with her hand), Rise:
my husband, rise] Shameless, indeed, must be the
person, who, on knowing my husband’s heart to be
such, again becomes angry. Let then my husband be
in the enjoyment of happiness! I shall go. ( Wishes
to go).

KA'NCHA.—Mistress, be favourably dispos
Going away, leaving the great King thus fallen at the
feet, Your Highness is sure to feel remorse.



--- Page 204 (OCR) ---
pp. 16-78. } 40 [ Act 1.

Va'savA—Away, you silly girl! Where is the
reason either for favour or remorse in this oase? So
come away, lot us go.

Kivc—Relont, my Queen, do relont.

{ He repeats—'I shall wipe off the riddish tint’ &o. /.

Vinu’—Get up, ho! The Queen has gous away
why do you esy in the wilderness then ?

KinG—(Raising his head and seeing). How is it that
the Queen has gone even, without showing favour?

‘Vipu’—How has she not shown favour, when we
stind yot with our persons uninjured (all safo)?

KING—Fie upon you, idiot! Why do you make
fon of me thus? It is rather the result of your action
that this great mishap has befallen us. For,

Our attachment has developed from day to day
‘owing to the feeling of love being ( mutually ) highly
esteemed. So, seeing this slip on my part, never com
mitted before, that intolerant darling of mine will surely
give up life to-day; for, a blundering, when love
reaches it climax, becomes intolerable! (15)

Vipu'—Oh, I do not know what the Queen, being
angry, will do; but Sagarika, I can guess, will live a
hard life!

Kin@—Friend, I too think so. Alas, my dear
Sagarika!

( Then enter SA'GARIKA’ wearing the dress of
Va’saVapatra’ ).

Sa’GaR—( Dejectedly ). Luckily, I have not'been
noticed by any one while coming out of the picture
hall, with the dress of the Queen put on, What shall
I then do now? (Reflects tearfully).

‘Vipv’.—Oh, why do you stand like one bawildered ?
‘Think of some remedy for this.

KING—-Why, it is just the same that I am think-
ing about. Friend, I see no other remedy in this case
save the Queen’s propitiation, Come, then, thither
let us go.

(Zhey'watk forth ).


--- Page 205 (OCR) ---
Act IIT. ] 4 Lp

SA'GAR.—~/ Musing /. Bettor I should cease to
exist (die) by hanging myself up, than be disgraced by
the Queen on coming to know about our engagement
affair, I will then go to the Aioka tree and do as
desired.

Vipu'.—( Listening ). Stay, Ob, stay, for a while ;
the sound of footsteps is heard; I think the Queen,
fooling repentant, might be coming.

KING—Friend, the Quean i
perchance it may even be so, So ascertain it

indeed, noble-minded ;

Vipu'—As Your Honour commands, ( /e walls
around .

SAGAR—/ Advancing). I will then make a noose
of the Madhavi oresper, and hanging myself from the
Aboka tree, will kill myself. ( Prepares a noose with
the creeper ). Alas, father, ho, mother, here T, an
unlucky creature, forlora and helpless, dis, (With these
words throws the noose round her neck).

Vipu/—( Looking ). But who again oan this be?
How now! It is Queen Vasavadaita! ( In alarm;
aloud). Save, save, O friend! Here is Queen
Vasavadatta killing herself by hanging !

KING—/ Advancing, in great haste). Whore is sho,
where is she?

Vipu'—Oh, here !

KING—( Approaching and removing the noose from
her neck}. 0 you acting rashly, why is this foul dood
being done ?

The noose being round your neck, my life has
come up to my throat (as it were) ; so this my attempt
is (rathor) in self-interost ; give up this adventure, my
darling. (16)

SA'GA.—( Seeing the KING). Ah! How now! Itis
the Master! (Joyfully, to herself). Truly speaking,
love of life (lit. desire to live) has again sprung up in
me on beholding him. Or rather, gazing on him and
having become happy thereby, I shall quit life with
quite an easy heart. (Aloud). Leave me; let my



--- Page 206 (OCR) ---
pp. 80-81. ] 4a [ Act 111.

Jord leave mo! This person is, indeed, in the power
of another, and will not get such an opportunity
again to die! (Wishes to throw the noose round
her neck again).

Kine—(Odserving closely; with joy, to himself). How
now! It is my darling Sagariké! (Removing the noose
from her neck).

Away, away with this extremely desperate act of
thine; do thou throw away, quickly, this creeper-
noose; for a moment, O mistress of my life, twine
the noose of thy arms round my neck to stay my life
though set out (to go)! (17)

(Pulling her arm, throwing it round his neck and
gesticulating the thrill of touch). Friend, this is a
shower without ( the presence of) clouds !

‘Vipv'—Oh, it is just so, if Queen Vasavadatts
doos not come, acting the part of an untimely galo
(Then enter VA'SAVADATTA’ and KA'NCHANAMA'LA’).

Va’saVA—Maid Kafichanamala, I acted vory
oruelly in coming away after having slighted my
husband fallen at my fost in that ‘manner. So, I will
now go personally and conciliate my husband.

KA’KOH.—Who else but the Queen knows to speak
in this way? Better be the Kingja bad person, but
not the Queen. Let Your Highness como, then.

(They walk around ).

KING—O you simple one, why am I even now
foiled in my object by (such) indifference ?

KA‘NOH.—( Listening}. Mistress, since Master is
talking near at hand, I guess he is coming just to
pacify you.

Va'sava—( Joufully). If s9, I will go unobserved
from behind, and casting my arms round his neck will
please him.

Vipu'—Lady Ségariké, have an easy mind and
talk with my dear friend.

haii


--- Page 207 (OCR) ---
Act IIT. J re) [ pp: 82-88.

Va'SaV.—( Hearing; with sorrow). © Kafichanamala,
how is it that Sagériké has come here? So I will
listen and then advance. (She does accordingly).

SA'GA—My lord, why are you, with this false
courtesy, making yourself guilty towards the Queen
who is dearer (to you) than even life?

KING—O you, you are certainly the speaker of
what is not true, For,

Tquaked when the pair of hor breasts throbbed
through hard breathing; when she observed silence, T
addressed sweet words; and when her face had its
eye-brows bent (through anger) I fell prostrate at ber
foot in that way : thus all that was service on my part
due to the Queen's inborn nobility of mind (and
nothing more) ; but what is (true) love, which has its
flavour heightened by steady affection,—that I have for
you (alone)! (18)

Va'sava.—{Advancingat once). My husband, this is
worthy of you; it befits you!

KING—(Seeing; with confusion). My Queen, it is
not proper for you to blame me without cause.
Mislod by the resemblance of dress, we thought her to
be yourself, and came hore.

VA'SAVA.—(Inanger). Riso, my lord, rise. Why
should you suffer trouble even now owing to the
service of one naturally high-born ?

KING—/To himself). What? Is this also overheard
by the Queen? Then I have no hope whatever as
rogards the Queen's pacification. (Remains with face
‘hung down).

ViDU'—Madam, wrongly led to believe, by the
similarity of dress, that you were destroying yourself
by hanging, I brought my dear friend here. If you do
not believe what I say, then soo this creeper-noose-
(Shows the creeper-noose).

Va'sava.—(Angrily). 0 Kafichanamala, secure this
Bréhmana by binding him with this very creeper-noose’
and place this ill-bred girl in the front.



--- Page 208 (OCR) ---
pp- 88-85. J “4 [ Act IV.

KANOHA—As the Queen commands. ( Kettering
VIDW’. with the creeper-noose ). Hapless man, experience
now tho fruit of your own evil plan! Sagarika, do you
also step forward.

S'AGAR—/ To herself}. Ob, fie! Meritless that Tam,
T was not able even to die as { wished!

‘Vipu'—~{ Despairingly looking at the KING).O friend,
remember me—a helpless prson subject to misery
owing to the Quocn’s captivity.

(Beit V/asavaparTa’, accompanied by all )

Krna—(Sorrowfully ), Alas! Oh! Pity!

Shall I think of that face of the Queon robbed of
its affectionate smile by long-cherished rage; or of
Sagarika frightened by being rebuked with intenso
(it. highly developed ) wrath; or of Vasantaka, bound
and led away from here? Thus subjected to pain of
every form, I do not experience ease even for a
moment, (19)

What is the use of my staying here, then? In
I will therefore enter to propitiate the Queen.

( Bxeunt Omnes).
END oF Act IIL,
STYLED “ SAMKETA.”

Act’ Iv.

(Bnter SuSAMGATA’ in fears, with a necklace of
Jewels )

Sus—(Hesving a sigh, pi'eously). Alas, dear friend
Sagarika! O bashful one, O you of noble disposition,
© you so loving to your frlends, 0 you of gentle aspect,
where can I see you now? ( Weeps; looking up and
sighing). Ah, cursed fate, rolentless, if one like that, of
uncommon beauty and splondour, was created by you,
why thon was she reduced to such a change of condi-
tion? This neckloss of jewels was placed in my hands
hy her, despairing of life, saying—“Give It to some
Bra‘hmana,” Iwill then look out for a Bra’hmana,



--- Page 209 (OCR) ---
Act IV. }

[ pp. 85-87.

(Going round and looking). Ab, here, indeed, is noble
Vasantaka coming this very way. ‘To him then I will
give this,
(Then enter the delighted VASANTAKA).

VA8.—Hallo, hallo, ho! To-day indeed, I was set
free by Her Majesty, appeased by my friend, and my
belly well filled with Modakas by hor with her own
hands. I will then go and see my dear friend. (Walks
around),

SUS—(Advancing suddenly; weeping). Noble
Vasantaka, just stay a moment,

Vas.—(Secing). Ab, Susamgata ! O Susamgaté, why
do you weep? Nothing disastrous, { hope, has befallen
Sagarika ?

Sus—Just that I am going to relate. That poor
girl, indeed, was, at the approach of mid-night, trans
ported, nobody knows whore, by the Queen, having
got a report circulated that she was to be taken to
Uijayint

Vinv'—/With pain). A very oruel thing, inde
was done by the Queen.

SUS.—And this jewel-necklace was delivered into
my hands by her, despairing of life, saying—"Give this
to the noble Vasantaka,” So let the noble one accept
this.

Vipu’.—/ Weeping). Lady, under such circumstances
my hands do not proceed to receive it. (Roth weep).

Sus.~(Joining her puims). Your noble self should
aceept it, just favouring her.

Vipu'—( Musing), Or bring it, so that with this
itself T will divert my friend, grieved at the sopara-
tion of Sagarika.

Su8—(Presents it)

Vrpu'.—{Taking it and examining it; with wonder),
Susamgata, but whence could shecome to possess such
an ornament ?

Sus—Noble one, she was asked by me alga (about
that), through curiosity.



--- Page 210 (OCR) ---
pp. 7-89. ] 46 {Act IV.

Vipu’.—What did she say then ?

‘$us—Then she looked upwards, heaved a long
sigh, and saying, “ O Susamgaté, what have you to do
with this tale?" began to weep.

Vipv—Surely the ornamentitself, which is out of
the reach of ordinary persons, tells that she is, in
evory way, of high pedigree. Susatigaté, where is my
friend now?

‘SuS.—Noble one, having left theQueen’s palace,
‘Master has just now gone to the crystal-bower, Let
Your Honour go then, I too will be by the side of
the Queen,
vinv’.

Just so, (Exeunt BOTH).
End of the PRAVES'AKA.

(Then enter the KING seated).

K1na—/ Reflecting).

Not indeed, by equivocal oaths, by endearing
words, by ministering to her desire all the more, by the
(manifestation of a) great sense of shame, by prostra-
tions at her fost, and by the constant exhortations of
her friends, did the Queen return to herself (her usual
genial disposition), as she did, when by her, weeping,
anger was removed, of her own motion, having wasbed
it off, as it were, with the waters of her tears. (1)

(Sighing, anziously). Now thatthe Queen has been
pleased, only concern for Sdgariké troubles me. For,

That my darling, with o frame as delicate as the
interior of @ lotus, having melted away in that way
at tho first embrace at the nook, firm on account of the
first fervour of passion, has entered my heart, I think,
through the passages of the holes made by the shafts of
Madane, falling the very moment. (2)

(Reflecting), Bven that Vasantaks, who was the
object of my confidence—he, too, has been imprisoned
by the Queen, Before whom, then, shal} I shed tears?
(Sighs).



--- Page 211 (OCR) ---
Act IV. ] a L pp. 89-01.

(Enter VASANTAKA).

Vipv'—/Seeing the KING). This my dear friend»
bearing a body possessing commendable beauty though
emaciated on account of excessive longing, appears,
indeed, all the more splendid, like the second da:
moon (in the bright half) risen. Iwill then approach
him. (Approaching). Bliss to your Honour! Luckily
are you seen again with these eyes by me, though
fallou into the Queen's hans.

KING—Seeing with o>). Hey! Vasantaka comes}
Embrace me, friend!

Vipu'.—( Embraces him).

KING—Friend, by your dress itself is declared the
Quoon's favour unto you. Tell me, then, what the
news is about Sa’garika’.

Vipw'—(Stands confused with face downeast),

Kiva—Friend, why don't you tell ?

Vipu'—I am not able to tell you what is
unpleasant,

KING~/ With anguish). Friend, how do you say,
unpleasant? Clearly, she has quitted life! Alas! My
doar Sagarikal (He faints)

Vipv'—( With alarm), Revive, revive, my friend!

Kine—( Having revived ; with tears).

Life, quit me who am exceedingly ungenerous; O
you, be courteous, and act according to my words: If
you dojnot depart at ones, then you are certainly
robbed; for that one with an elephant's gait has gone
vory far now. (3)

Vinu'—Friend, do not take it otherwise. Tho
poor girl, it is rumoured, has been sent to Ufjayini by
the Queen. Hence I said it was unpleasant.

KiNo—How! Sent to Ujjayini? Oh) The Queen's
absence of regard'for me! Friend, who told you this?

Vinv'—(Sighing, with tears). Susatgaté. And
moro ; this necklace was sent by her to my hands, with
some object in view.



--- Page 212 (OCR) ---
pp- 91-98. ] 48 Act IV.

Kie—What else, (except) to console me? So
bring it, friend!

Vipu.—(Presents it)

Kinc—(Taking the necklace, closely observing it
and placing it on his bosom). Alas

By this (necklace), fallen off aftor having obtained
tho ombrace of hor neck, this similarly-circumstanced
body of mine is comforted, like a friend. (4)

Friend, you put 2%, on; so that, beholding it, I
shall sustain mysolf (lif. titce courage)

‘yipu'.--As Your Honoifr commands. (Wears it).

Kinc—(Shedding tears). Friend, the sight of my
friend is difficult to obtain again,

Vipu'—(Looking in the quarters in alarm), Priend,
spenk not thus loudly. Perchance some one, connected
with the Queen, may be passing about here.

(Bnter VASUMDUARA’ with a cane-staff
in’her hand).

Vasu DHARA‘-(Advancing). Prosperity, prosperity,
to Your Majesty! My lord, here, indeed, is
Vijayavarman, Rumanvat’s sister's son, waitng at the
door, wishing to communicate some pleasant news.

Kine—Vasumdhard, usher him in without delay.

‘VASUMDHARA/—As Your Msjesty commands:
(Departing and entering again with VISAYAVARMAN),
Vijayavarman, here, indeod, is Master; let Your
Honour approach.

VisAvA.—(Havin approached). Prosperity, prospe-
rity to Your Majesty! My Lord, congratulations to”
you on the victory obtained by Rumanvat!

KING—Commendable, Rumanvat, commendable !
In a short time you have achieved a great end!
Vijayavarman, sit down here.

‘Vurava.—(Sits dows).

KING—Vijayavarman, is the King of the Kosalas
vanquished?

‘VAYA.—(Ho is), by Your Majesty's prowess.



--- Page 213 (OCR) ---
Act LV. } 49 [ pp. 98-04,

KING—Vijayavarman, then tell me, how it was,
I wish to hear the full details,

VUJAYA—My lord, listen—At Your Majesty's
command we started from here with a large army,
irresistible on account of the numerous elephants,
horses and foot-soldiers, and going ina few days we
began to encamp our battalions, having blocked up the
outward passage of the King of the Kosalas stationed
in a fort on the mountain Vindbya.

Kinc—What next?

‘ViJAYA.—Thon the Kosala-King also, unable to
bear the affront through pride, put into battle-srray
the whole of his army, mostly consisting of elephant

Vipv'—Finish (Jif, narrate) quickly! Oh, my
heart trembles, as it were!

KING—And after that?

VIJA—My lord, and he, whose resolution was
formed,

Having issued forth for giving battle from the
Vindhya mountain, faced (us), blocking up, the very
moment, the divisions of the quarters with the close
and compact array of his army of lordly elephants, as
if with another Vindbya mountain; Rumanvat, whose
foot-soldiers were crushed by the arrays of elephants
in rut, falling on him, rapidly discharging arrows,
encountered him in an instant, his ardour being
doubled by the obtainment of what was desired. (5)

And,

‘As thebattle began, in which heads ware severed by
the strokes of weapons, their helmets being tossed off
by missiles, wherein there swelled a momentary river
of blood, and in whioh weapons clanged and fire flashed
forth from armours, the King of the Kosalas, seated oh
a powerful (tit, intoxicated) elephant, was challenged
‘as he was keeping off his army from a break-down, and
slain by Rumanvat, single-handed, with hundreds of
arrows. (6)

‘Vipu'—Prosperity, prosperity to Your Honour!
‘We have triumphed! (With these words he rises and
dances).

men 5



--- Page 214 (OCR) ---
pp. 94-96. 50 [ Act IV.

KING—Bravo! Lord of the Kosalas, bravo! Even
the death of you is commendable, whose prowess even
the enomies thus extol. What next?

‘Visa¥.—My lord, then Rumanvat, too, posted my
elder brother Jayavarman over the Kosala country
and is himself now coming with slow marches, leading
the whole of his army wounded in the fight.

Kinc—Vasumdhara, tell Yaugandharayana that
my favour be bestowed on this person,

‘Vasv.—As Your Majesty commands.

(Bzit with VIJAVAVARMAN).
(Enter Ka’SOHANAMA'L’A).

Ka'NCHA—I am ordered by the Queen thus—Maid
Kéfichanamala, go you and present this magician to
my husband. (Walking about and looking on). Here,
indeed, is the master. I will then approach
(Advancing). Victory, victory, to the Lord! The Queen
requests—Here is a magiolan, named Sarvasiddbi,
come from Ujjayint. May my husband, therefore,
seo him.

KING—I take pleasure in magio; quickly bring
him in, thon-

Ka'nci.—As Your Majesty commands. (Ezit and
re-enter, accompanied by the Magician, with a bunch of
‘peacock’s feathers in his hand).

MAGIOIAN—( Waving the bunch of feathers).

Bow to the feet of Indra, whose name is closely
associated with (the art of) magio, as also of Sambara,
whose fame is well ostablished in magic. (7)

Ka'NOHA.—/Advancing). Sire, here is the magician.

MAGICIAN—Prosperity, prosperity, to Your
Majesty | My lord,

Should the moon be oxhibited on earth, or a
mountain in the sky, or fire in the ocean, or dusk at
noon? Give the command. (8)

Or, why wasto many words ?

This is my solemn
my proceptor's incantations, I will show whatever you
dosire at hoart to see. (9)



--- Page 215 (OCR) ---
Act IV. J 51 [ pp. 96-98.

Vipu'—O friend, bo attentive. Such is (the
display of) his self-confidence that everything can be
possible.

KINo—My good man, wait for a while.
Kafichanamdlé, say to the Queon :—This magician
is yours; and this place is cleared of the people.
You should come then; together we shall see his
performance.

Ka/NCHA—As Your Majesty commands. (Exit).

(Enter Va'savapatta’ and Ka’NOHANAMA'LA’).

Va'SAVA.—I have a leaning towards thatmagician,
as he comes from Ujjayini.

Ka/NCH.—This {s, indeed, the Queen's high regard
for her kinamen ;80, my mistress, proceed. (They walk
about)

Va'sav.—(Approaching). Prosperity, prosperity to
my lord!

KING—My Queen, this man has vaunted a gr
deal ; sit down here then ; let us see.

(Va'SAVADATTA® sits down).

KINO—My good’ man, now begin your magical
feats,

‘MAGICTAN—As Your Mojesty commands.

(Dancing in many ways and waving his bundle of
feathers).

I will oxhibit, in the sky, the gods headed by Hari,
Hara and Brahman, the lord of the gods (Indra), and
the host of the Siddhas, Chéranas, and the heavenly
nymphs, dancing. (10)

May Your Majesty behold |

KING—/Looking up and descending from his seat).

Ob, wonder, wonder! See, my Queen

Herein the sky is Brahmf. on his lotus,and this is
Sankara with the tiara of the digit of the moons there
{is Hari, the destroyer of tho demons, with (distinguished
by)bis four arms marked with the bow, the sword, the
mace and the discus; thie is (Indra), the lord of the
gods, seated on the Airavata; and here, my Queen, are
the other gods, and also the celestial nymphs, danciig
with their anklets jingling responsively to the mdyi
tnonts of their fect, (11) eal

a



--- Page 216 (OCR) ---
pp- 98-09. ] Be [ Act lV.

‘Va'sav.—Wonder, Oh, wonder !

Vinv'.—(Aside). Ho, Slavo's son, magician, what
isthe use of your showing the gods and the Apsarasas
If you want to have him pleased, then show Ségarika |

(Bnter VasuMDEARA’),

VasuspHARA’'—( Approaching the KING). Pros-
perity, prosperity, tothe lord!

Minister Yaugandharayana bogs to say—Hore has
arrived Vasubhiti, the prime minister of Vikramabahu,
along with Babhravya, our Chamberlain. So Your
Majesty should be pleased to sce him at this very
happy moment. I, too, will just come, having finished
what-ren.ains of the business to be done.

VA’SAVA—My dear, let the magic-show stand
over. Tho chief minister, Vasubhiti, has come from
my maternal uncle's house. So my husband should
see him at once,

KING—As the Queen says. (To the Magioian),
Good man, you may stop now.

MAGIGIAN—As Your Majosty commands.

(Waving the bunch of feathers again; departing).
But one more performance of inine should be neces-
sarily seen by Your Majesty.

KING—Good man, wo shall see.

‘Va‘saV.—Kéfichanaméla, go you and give him a
reward,

KAa'NCHA—As Your Majosty orders, (sit with
the MAGICtAN).

KING—Vasantake, go forth and conduct Vasu-
bhati hithor.

‘Va‘sa.—As Your Majesty commands. (Ezit with
VASUMDEARA’)

(Enter Vasuniu'tt and BA‘BERAVYA followed by
‘VASANTAKA/.

‘VasUBHU'TI—(Looking all round). Oh, the magni-
ficence of the lord of the Vatsas! For here,

Attracted by the prosperity-seouring elephant while
looking attentively at the noble (lit. favourite) steeds
captivated by the strain of music, when standing for a
moment in the conolaves of (tributary) princes; and with



--- Page 217 (OCR) ---
Act IV. 83 Cpp. 99-101.

the wealth of the King of Simhala forgotten all at
once, T am made as though a rustlo by the objects of
great curlosity met (/it. lying) at the very door. (12)

Ba’BHRAVYA—Vasubhati, at the thought that I
shall soe my master to-day after a long time, I am
experiencing an indescribable change of condition
owing to great joy. For,

‘My great satisfaction lends help to-day to my aget
it aggravates yet more the increase of tremor, through
nervousness; it obscures the more my dim eye-sight
with voils of tears; and it renders more dull my speech
in broken words owing to the choking of the throat. (13)

Vipu'—(Stepping forward). Come this wayy this
way, Your Excellency!

VASUBHU'TI—(Seeing the jewel-necklace on Vidd-
shaka's neck; aside). Babbravya, I perceive this is the
very jowel-necklace which was given by the King to
the princess at the time of her departure.

Ba’BHRAVYA—Minister, there is a resemblance.
‘What then, shall I ask Vidishaka how ho got It?

‘VAsu.—Babbravya, don’t you, don’t you do so,
On account of the abundance of gems in a great royal
household, similarity of ornaments is not difficult to be
found. (They walk on).

‘VipU.—Sir, hero is His Majesty; let the Minister
approach,

Vasv.—(Advancing). May Your Majesty prosper !

KING—{Rising). Noble one, E bow to you.

VASUBH.—May you be of long life !

KING—A seat, a seat, for the noble one

‘vipu’—Here isa seat. May the ministersit down.

(VasuBHU'Tt sits down),

BA’BHRAVYA—Sire, Babhravya bows down to you

KING—{(Placing his hand on his back). Babhravya,
sit here.

BA‘BH.—(Sits down).

Vipv'—Minister, hore is Queen Vasavadatth
bowing to you,

Va‘sava—Noble sir, I salute you.

‘Vasv.—Long-lived one, may you obtain a son'likt
the king of Vateo | het



--- Page 218 (OCR) ---
pp. 101-108. } ot [ ActIY.

(AIL sit down).

KivG—Noble Vasubhiti, ts it all woll with His
Honour, the King of Sivhala?

VAsuBE.—( Looking up and sighing) Siro, I do not
know what to say.

(Remains with face hung down).

Va'eav.—(With dejeciion; to herself). Oh, fi, fo!
What will Vasubbiti tell now?

K1NG—Tell us what this is. Noble one, my soul
is almost distracted,

BA’BH.—(Aside). Minister, even after « long
time this must be told; speak it out then.

(Yasu.—/ With tears). Sire, it is not possible to
communicate it; yat here I tell it, ill-fated that I am.
That Ratnavall, of long life, his daughter, who being
already sought in marriage was bestowed upon (bo-
trothed to) Your Majesty by the lordof Sithala, on
hearing that Vasavadatté had perished in a fire—

KING—(Aside). Queen, what falsehood Is this that
your maternal uncle’s minister is uttering ?

Va'sava.—(Smiling). Husband, it cannot be
known who utters a falsehood.

‘Vip0'.—What happoned to her then?

‘Vasv.—She, while being brought to Your Majesty's
presence was drowned in the sea owing to shipwreck,
(Remains weeping, with face cast down).

‘Va'sav.—( With tears). Ab, 1am uidone, unlucky
that Iam! Ah! Cousin Ratnévali, whore are youn w?
Give me a reply.

KING—Queon, takeheart, take heart! Insorutable
fs the course of fate. Those two themselves, I say,
who went down through shipwreck and rose up again
(were saved), sre instances unty you. (Pointe to
‘Vasusnu'rt and Ba’BHRAVYA),

Va'saV.—Husband, it is propor; but whence such
Juck in my’case ?

(A great uproar behind the S eves). 3

Here, in the innor apartment, has broken out, all
of a sudden, this fire, imparting to. the mansions the
beauty of golden turrets by its masses of flames,

having its intense host indioated by its soorching the



--- Page 219 (OCR) ---
Act IV. J 35 [ pp- 108-105.

tops of the thick-grown trees of the garden, making tho
pleasure-mountain dark like a watery cloud by its
smoke descending on it, and causing distress to the
women-folk by Its burning heat, (14)

Moreover,

‘his fire has sprung up, to give veracity as it
were to the ramour about the queen's belog burnt,
which was formorly circulated in Lavavaka. (15)

(AU look about in alarm).

Kinc—(Suddenly rising). How now! A fire in the
harem! Alas! Queen Vdsavadatta is burnt! Alas!
My darling Vasavadatta !

Va’saVA.—Husband, save, save |

KInG—Ahj How was the queen not noticed, through
extreme flurry, though standing here! Queen, take
heart, take heart!

VA‘3AV.—Husband, I did not say that for my sake
Here is poor Sagariké perishing, restrained with a
chain by my cruel self. So let my husband resoue her!

Kiya—How now, Queen, Sigariké perishes! Here
I gol

Vasu.—Sire, why is the part of a moth played
when there is no grave cause for it ?

Ba'BHRAVYA—Sire, Vasubhiti says the right thing:

Vipu'—(Seizing the KING by the upper garment),
Friend, do not, indeed, do not do this rash act

KING—(Dropping the upper garment), Bie, fool !
Sagariké is boing destroyed; why is life still sustained?
(Having acted entering the fire and gesticulating being
overpowered by tle smoke).

Desist, desist, O fire; give up this continuous
column of smoke ; why do you display this lofty circle
of flames? What (harm) will you do tome who was
not consumed by the fire of separation from my
beloved, having the burning beat of the fire at the time
of universal destruction? (16)

(Va’sava.—How is it that my husband bas resolutely
acted thus, following the words of me, a miserable
creature! So I too will follow my husband)

Vinv'.—( Walking forth and standing in the fronth,
Madam, I too will be your guide on the way. FP

Pl



--- Page 220 (OCR) ---
PP» 105-106. ] 86 [Act IV

Vasu! ‘How now! Vatsardja has already entered
the fire. So behoves me, who have witnessed the
decease of the princess, also to make an offering of
myself just here (in this fire).

Ba’BHRAVYA—Alas! Sire! Why is this race of
Bharata causelessly consigned to (the domain of)
uncertainty? Or rather, what is the use of talk?
T too will act in a way befitting my devotion,

(All act entrance into the fire).
(Enter Sa’CARIKA’ bound with fetters)

SA'GAR—(Looking into the quarters) Oh, fie! The
fire has burst into flames all round. (Reflecting; with
gratification). Fortunately the fire will, to-day, put an
end to my suffering.

KinG—Ab! Hore is Sagarika standing with the
fire close upon her. I will then quickly attend to her.
(Hastily approaching). Ab, darling, why do you still
remain calm (unconcerned) when there is causo for
haste (or, flarry) ?

8a'GAR—(Seeing the KING, to herself), How now |
My husband! On seeing him I have again got a desire
for life. (Aloud). Let master save, let master save !

E1mG—0 timid one, dismiss your fear! Let this
thick effusion of smoke be borne for a moment. (Looking
forth). Alas, Oh, fie! This garment dropped from your
breasts has taken fire. (Observing). Why doyou stumble
again and again ? (Marking closely). How is it that you
are fettered with a chain? (Girding up his loins). I will
quickly bear you away from here. Take hold of me,
dearest! (17)

(Embracing her by the neck and gesticulating the
pleasure of touch, with eyes closed). Oh, the heat I felt has
disappeared in a moment. Cheer up, darling, cheer up!

Evidently the fire does not burn you although
touching you, since, O darling, this your touch
removes heat itself, (18)

(Opening the eyes, looking in the quarters and letting
go the hold of Sa'GaRIKA’). Oh! A great wonder!

Where is that fire gone? Tho inner apartment is in
the same state (as before)—(Seeing Va’SavaparTa’),
How now | This is the daughter of the King of Ujjayin!!



--- Page 221 (OCR) ---
Act IV.) ov L pp. 106-108.

Va'sava.—(Feeling the body of the KING with joy).
Luckily my husband has his body unharmed.

KING—This is Babhravya !—

BA'BHRAVYA—Sire, now wo have boon brought
back to life |

KING—This is Vasubhu’ti —

VAsv.—May the great King prosper!

KING—And this is my friend |—

Vipu'.—Prosperity, prosperity to Your Honour!

Kr

—Does my mind rove (as) in a dream; or can this
be magic? (19)

‘Vipv'.—Oh, entertain no doubt: this is, indeed,
magic. It was said by that whore’s son, the magician,
that Your Highness should perforce see one more feat
of his magic. So jt is just that.

KING—My Queen, here is Ségariké brought by me
at your bidding.

Va’savA.—Husband, I know it.

Vasu.—( Seeing SA’GARIKA'; aside ). Babbravy
this girl is like the princess.

BA’'BH.—Ministor, the same occurs to my mind

too,
Vasu.—(To the KING), Sire, whence is this girl ?
KING—The Queen knows it.
‘VAsv.—Quoon, whence indeed is this damsel ?
Va'SAV.—Minister, she was delivered over into my
hands by ministor Yauzandharéyana, saying tiat sh
was obtained from the sea, Honco it is that she is
called Ségariké.
KING—(7o himself). Delivered by Yaugandharé.
yana! How can he do a thing without informing sue!
Vasv.—(Aside). Babhravya, since there is a vers

similar necklace of gems on Vasantaka’s neck, and

the maiden also is brought from the sea, sho is clearly
Ratndvalt, the daughter of the king of Sihala !

(Advancing ; aloud). Long-lived one, Ratnévall, are
you reduced to this plight ?

S8a’GA.—(Observing VASUBRU'TI, with tears). How
now! Minister Vasubbati!

‘VasU.—{ Weeping). Ah, Tam undone, unfortunate
that Iam! (Falla on the ground), be



--- Page 222 (OCR) ---
pp. 108-110.) 58 [ Act Iv.

Sa’GAR—Ah, father! Ab, mother! Whers are you?
Give me a reply. (Dropping on VASUBHU'D faints).

Va'sav.—(In confusion), Noble Chamberlain, is this
my cousin, Ratnavalt ?

Ba’BERAVYA—Madam, that fs she!

Va'sav.—{ Clasping Ratna'valr' ). Take heart,
sister, take heart!

ING—How now! This is the deughter_ of
Vikramabahu, the king of Siwhala, of high descent!

‘Vin “—(Touching the jewel-necklace ; to himself
[knew from the very beginning thet such'an ornament
could not Delong to an ordinary porson

‘Vasv.—(Rising). Long-lived one! Revivo, revi
Don't you see, this your elder sister {s ill at et
embrace her, therefore.

SAGAR —<Reviviny, and seeing Va’SAVADATTA’
herself). T havo, indeed, given offence to the Queen ; 60
Teannot show 'my face to her. (Remains with head
downeast)

‘VA’SAVA—( With toara, stretching forth her hands)
Come, come; O extremely hard-hearted one, now at
Toast show affection (Clasps her at the neck; RATNA™-
VALI ges‘iculates stumbling ; aside). Husband, I em
ashamed of this my oruelty ; 80 remove her fettor

KING—(With satisfaction). As the Queen says.
(Does accordingly).

‘Va‘sAV.—Husband, I havo, indeed, beon made (to
act like) a wicked woman by minister Yaugandharé-
yana, by whom, although knowing, nothing was told.

(Then enter YAUGANDEARA'YANA),

Yavean—

hen, at my request, separation from her husband
was consented to by the Queen, then it was that she
was placed in (subjected to) creat distress by arranging
for your gotting anothor wifo: true that thiy attain
ment of the sovereignty of the world by Your Mejesiy
will give joy to her; still, through shame, I am nut

able to show my face to her. (20)
( Reflee ina for a moment). Or, what is to be done?
Such is the vow of devotion to one s master, that

takes little account, in its execution, even of those
worthy of the highest respect. (Looking on). Here is
His Majesty Let me then approach. (Approaching).
Prosperity, prosperity to my lord! Sire, pardon me for
what was done by me without informing you,



--- Page 223 (OCR) ---
Act IV. 69 pp. 110-112.
Bp,

K1NG—Yaugandhariyana, tell what you did with-
out informing me.

YAUGAN.—May Sire sit down. I will relate overy-
thing.

(AU sit down according to their positions).

YAuGaN, ad With hands folded), Listen, Sire! Of
this daughter bf the king of Siwhala, it was predicted
by a seer (Siddha) that whoever would accept her hand
in marriage would be the sovereign of the whole world,
Then, when she was not given (to Sire) by the lord
of Simiala, avoiding mental afiliction to Queen
Vasavaiattd, although repoatedly sought by us for
Sire, th-ough our belief in that (prophecy)—

KniG—What then ?

YAUGAN.—Then, having got a report ofroulated
that the Queen was burnt in the fire at Livanaka,—~
Babbravya was (again) sent to his presence,

KING—What followed has been heard by me,
Now with what object was this girl delivered into the
hands of the Queon?

Vipu’—Ob, it can just be known, though untold !
—That, placed in the inner apartment, she might
casily;oross the range of your eyes. \

KiNG—{(Smiling). Yaugandharéyana, your motive
thas been well grasped by Vasantaka!

YAauGaw.—As Your Majesty says !

KING—The Magician’s affair also, I take it, was
of your own design ?

YAUGAN.—Sire, it was. How else could Sire have
soon hor, confined in the inner apartment? And when
not seen, how could she have been recognized by Vasu-
bhati? (Smiling). (Now that her cousin is recognized,
tho Queen is tho oblof authority as to how to dispose
of her.)

Vasava.—(With a amile)- Noble one, why don’t
you say clearly—Give Ratndvalt to him (the King)?

ViDv'—Noble lady, you have well guessed the
ministe:’s intention !

‘Vasava.—(Eztending her hand). Come, Ratnévalt,
come, Let this much at least, worthy of feisister
happen at my hands, Beis



--- Page 224 (OCR) ---
pp: 112-113. J 60 {Act 1v.

(Decorating RATNA'VALY’ with her own ornaments.
taking her by the hand, and approaching the KING).
Husband, accept this one !

‘King—(Stretching forth hishands, with satigfaction).
What favour of the Queen is not esteemed by me?

‘Va'sAVA.—Husband, at a distance are her paternal
relations; so act in such a way thatshe will not
remember her kinsmen. (Gives her to him),

K1vs—As the Queen commands,

Vrpv.—(Laneing about), Bless me, Ok, Ho! The
whole earth has now, indeed, come into the hands of
my dent friend!

‘VASUBH.—Long-lived one, rightly, indeed, do you
possess the title of Queen!

YAUGAN.—Now my labours have borne fruit
Sire, say what farther good (Jit, desirable thing) shall
Tdo upto you?

{Kinc—Is there anything to be desired beyond
this? For—

‘Vikramabéhu is made one with mo; this my darl-
ing, Sagariié, the most preoions object on the surface
of the earth, the sole cause of the acquisition of the
earth bound by the seas. is gained ; the Quoen has been
pleased owing to tho recovery of her sister; and the
Kosalas are conquered; you, the ablest of ministers,
being there, what blessing do I not possess for which
Tan entertain a wish ?)(21)

Still, let there be this—

(The Actors’ Benediction).

May Indra, sending down showors as desired,’make
the earth yield luxuriant crops; may eminent Brahm:
nas give satisfaction to the cclestials with sacrific
duly performed; may there be union of the good, as
Jong as the world exists, conducing to increased
happiness; and may tho (abusive) utterances of the
wicked, difficult to be controverted and indelible like
the adamantine glue, be completely laid st rest!! (22)

(Bzeunt Omnes).
(Bnd of Act IV., named AIYDRAJA'LIKA/,

(Here ends the NA'TIKA’ called RATNA'VALT,, the
composition of KING SRI'-HARSHA).



--- Page 225 (OCR) ---
NOTES.

P. 1, Following the tive-hononred practioo of Sanskrit
writers, the poot bosins his work with th» wewsl mofyula (the
, which im the euse of dramss i8
avh maiigala ia thought to be ueeete
sary for the removal of obstacles aut for the sate vompletion
2 work. This Naadf genurally consists of one or two

of threo as hure, sad verg rarely of fonr.
a the ease of tho presen
Venisambéra, ¢

play, however, as in that of the

0 additiontl s‘lokas are found in some

MSS,, but their authenticity may well be
uder those,

Sl i, In thie Sl, tho handfal of flowers thrown,
by Pérvali(comp. in this rospect the first Sl. of Vebl. ,
instead of arvatl herself, is zeferred to as competent to
grant protection, For, Hiuda posts often refer to some-
thing connected with, or some act (Cf. the first s'l. of
the Milvafidh, Madré, Go.) of, thelr favourite delty,
of to tho deity direotly, as a mark of great humility.
‘Phe handfal of dowers was thrown by Parvat! when she was
sent by her futher to propitiate Siva ( ayyerat ) while pract
ing penance on the HimAlayas after he had lot Batt (see
Kam, I. 58,54), According to the Kum., however, the =f
was ofored at tho fect of Siva Causthe saeewagay getiwe:
gear: TIL 61).
ia thist-Parvatt wished to place the offering of fowers
ead. With this object she raised herself on the tips of
hho tows, ‘The view of her developed limbs exeed S'iva to cant wists
fel eyes on her. At this PAreatt felt baehfol owing to. the feeling
of loves her hand shook nervously j end the Kunumdiali, mount to
fall on S'iva's head, missed ita destination and fell between the two.

qreraferna &2.—Oonstroe: agiqray ureraianat Bg: eae
ate aamartten oni: wiggdreawant orn UgeTlT ET.
emecar Grea fartarar fale diga: fem: [we] sea Pirmsar
waRITA: STS!

qrarqe—Dissolve grarapat of “wit: (Ouerar. ‘This ebe did
to rosch the lofiy head of Biva Otten, repeatedly
this may slso bo taken with qrgiae. STAT rrurrpase
to bend down, brought to « stooping posture:



--- Page 226 (OCR) ---
2 [ Act 1.

‘amar ann being erat agus. Otherwise wo should expect
aaret (arar: 1@: ), a the Varttike—ermtrfonreaee (eft
aeprit ) providing G¥ar# doos not apply in the present cas
for genet GT ee AU, remarks the Dewtreat. Tera wT:
ans ueeeae fem) greet re: wwiet} Sld-Keu, For

ilar instances, of. sex ar TaTTURTial Ragh, UT. 65 gt
rod: saaee avert Faties Wa ae: warelar Kir. 1V.9; gta
argenarerate de. Sls’, X. 24, This ie a favourite idea with
Sanskrit poets; of. Kum. TIT, 64, Mogh. 11.22; mapa
gts We fe, Sis, VEL. 66, ‘This explains the geggdieaet
ot Biva,

eat —at et areal seareat ai fr. at happiness, wolfare
and tho root z which has causal sense hero ( stravifeawaefn
aft: Sid.—Kau, ) with tho att, g (g:) by the Varttilke
Reenter satan. wee —arwarTl a Bree; now soo
com. For the change of iia to gar see Gr. § 280, Pan. V.4. 14.
Of. eg (fefraReatd:...gmge.cararcarare  fretraan |
Krum. 11, 67. (after weal etaniiga se: Mall. ).

Srrenr—a: area Rae A wind aur. ‘This properly
means ‘bashful,’ but hero it means ‘who camo to bo baabtal,?
folt ashamed ( when Sambbu looked at her with longing eyes
and she was affected with emotion). {f@a:—wished or
intended (to fall on the head ); # properly means ‘to act
ody’ Carat ); but, as sotion depends upon wish (for the
order is—arrarfet, TxBft, wat &e. ), it has often the sente of
‘to wish;? of. rad ayfrmgar cat arcegtergs Bh; 8% gr Bet
(ira der) agate wae Bhy,

ayware—Here wo havo thres.of the sight wiftre rms
or involuntary manifestations of strong feeling arising from
Sattea (tor those, s00 Intro. ), wis. horripilation (ee note on
AeqasT next floka), perspiration and tremor. As Sambha
looked at PArvatt with lovotul eyes, there was a rectprocation
of fooling on her part alto. Cf. ax gradi: widrerna® fea
‘Tonos mgs | goferaaeanl wag wt eEteATErE:
ats edtaneerqu Pir-P. Tl, 9, S00 Kum, IU. 68. fagewe—
‘The proposition f¢ reverses tho senso of (erg ; 40 this olthor
moans ‘gettingloose and falling down’ (not being properly
‘thrown ) oF ‘not reaching its destination,’ falling in the middle
(aot boing thrown with snificiont foree ). ssremt@:—properly
‘means ‘the cavity formed by joining the hollowed palims ;?
‘hence, secondarily (by Lnkshang), the thing contained thereini

i



--- Page 227 (OCR) ---
wrrteemated aff arent that which
reaches the end; henos, the interval or space between two
1. :—Acoording to Bistxt Niguakar, this has to be taken
nse, i.e. at moaning ‘you and all of us’, qeATaeaT-
aratet | He remarke—a aft ‘eaerdie wihieaw’ a ewee |
Ba eees geufteadwcel saermATR RTE | ceraTATe
aight gaeratianes aearced AeyCEAHSTATTTTETE, |

Inthia +1. there is Srlagire menifened, ite subatrata being
five and Parvatt (sugeraftores). Its permanent sentiment is ft
of love, as indicated by Siva'e weyraryare, and Phrvati’s wetya &e.
‘which aro ite agers, ond Parvatt's Gaye which is « exfrwnfere. For
the other toobnicalities, se Introduction.

‘The figure of speech in this 41. is Késyalitiga, as the tal-
ling in the middle of the handfal of flowors is explained by
such 6 ear, errata,

P.2, 61.2, Heroin the poet passes on to another soeno,
vis, that of the first meting in private of Pérvatt and Siva
after marriage.

Constrae: at Gah siegrta erent (faq) eae Rar
sunderat eyeysrey fea: get: ga: sneered dar ait at eT
eteegeer surrererercer Caer eT Gerer Ht HA aE

siteqean—aiewre is ‘cogornoss’, Thoinste. is Bea
‘ora: inbor, natural; fr. we+a with the afl, firg added eft.
This may also be taken with sfeqwita. fat—at ater.
ea: —Horo az roters to the speeches of inducement or persua-
sion used on euch occssions (itboing aftardeam). ‘The repetition
Andioates dicgt or totality, by the rule (aeqjege: Pin. VIII.
1.4 C onsteot stearate cqeT FTTH ear Sid.-Kew, ).
dicat ( ft-+ear ) lit, means ‘the desire to include every oa:
of overy one of a group,’ as gat gai(é. call) feat.
‘Parvati’s friends usod every word of enoouragement to induce
her to approach her husband. a=gqyo—may be taken as (1)
weg: fi: beloved at nya ora: vqaa: female friends or
relatives eq; or (2) gry: a kinsman or rel water:
(the wives of) arat sa: gag:. Fors meaning ‘ body
or collection of? ef. weftorrt feaanteteg: Vik. I. 9; fa-
wenitrnartie: aeaanit: Sak. TV; ae Geo Tbid. V, 16.

arfiget- ara: the of standing before or
In front of; by adding q ( east) to sitar.

et—infte eat a ee: the husband; fr. ¢+ sre (or) amet

by qeres! “Ott errarastar aA flow. srrearetee—site Dep. Pe



--- Page 228 (OCR) ---
4 [Act 1.

of qr with sit; by tho rale sq gueafa: Phy. VIL 4. 47,
tho vowel of the root gr proseded by a preposition ending in a
vowel is replaced by a whea the rcot is followed by s termi
nation boginning with qand having an indieatory @ ( fei@ ).
arsrarare—may moan—(1) ena: ererser TRENT aT CHAT,
who experienced tho emotion of fright gisyq flarry, agite
tion; ra anvthing exporinoed; hence ‘fesling’y ef. arraw:
A: wufee TEMA gee: Madr. IV. 4.—Or (2) sre gene fear
te: lve qqrererd! war, who was inspired with fear and
love ‘The frst way is better, as the fesling of love is in
cated by the epithet Gigaset. diigge—With the hair of
hor body standing on end. In erotic poetry this frara(tfarar is
considered as the Grat outward indication of love, end is
often referred to by posts; of, Vik. I. 11, Kam, VIL 77,
Ragh. VIL 22, &,

‘erat —For, tho ombarras
im s groat deal.

condition of his wite amused

81, quoted in K.-P. VIL. (209 under Kariks 15) ag an illostrae
ton of tho princijle thatthe actual mention of an Acceusory
Cartref) wen itis not suggested by an Bosusat (sgsre) peew-
Tiar to iteelé, dues not constitute © fault, Here the Accessory
athrgge onnoot be represented by the Bususnt ec, a that may bo
nuved by fear, anger, and the like. Hence, for a clear end un-
wistakableappeeheasion of the Accossory, ita mention by its own
term ia necossary,

The figuro of specoh is SeabAdeokti. Somo think that
thore is qaritits, bot for that, according to the K.~P., the
epithote ought to bo (irz or double-meaning.

&1, in the footnote (ear &o.)—In some editions and MSS,
thie is given as partof the Benediction, But it dos not
toom to be genuine, ‘The quibbling on words init is too much
on forthe somewbat artificial style of Harsha, Again,
ita inconeistent with the reveronco the post is expected to
have for Siva orevon for Viehon, Woe emnot expect hia
to moke either Parvati or Laksiu:l call ber busland fear
even in gaya.

This SL has a double application: tt rofors to Pérvaty
and 8 va, ard alto to Tnk-bmi and Ky ehys,each clause bav'ng.
double meaning. Constr. Il. 1, 2—grt maeaaa agi we:
ant dang | ame Prdor ae set aearlnt ME oy swe

13, 4—(1) ] Servers ag ge erITaet aT waAT ee



--- Page 229 (OCR) ---
Act 1. 5

aa Bar aaTE AE TTT; @) R wom Hoaay ge TST
ayy agaaes oi sear: oar qate ke,
acers—(I) aprea ainett: ft et: by adding wa in
‘sento, which is thon dropped in the ease of wit oF ¥3.
‘TheGod of Loves fit the Makara-bannered ; 0 calle from the
a-monster subdued by him and ropreseuted on his banner.
2) wae by isplication (zqerqm ) mean ‘ava animale"; beree,
the milky ocoan (ef. qraq), Lakshmi being one of the 14
jowels churaed ont of 1, Cf, tho well-known verse mei
Sequaicaersgn wvateaar: &e, (See A. Die. ).

aert—(1) Dostraction, For the story sce Kam. IU, 66,

; SivaeP. Adb, 11, (2) Oburning, ‘This word is derived
from we at Con, and not from agg 9th Conj., which will
give meat. erer—(2) Although Vishpa did not take pert
in tho cburaing, he was indirectly conueled with it, For
aupported the monntain Man ‘ara by assuming the form of @
tortoise, agit—(1) In connexion with mw, on my arcount,
(2) Forms ante, a6 at the aud of @ comp. lao 0
SG snd sometime ac aula, with an atverbinl force. c
amiareaesAitaeqeriarre: Kom, VL 185 aear@rer wat OF
ageaiuig ear: Nelop, XII, i9,

amgH—To be rend with a Héku (i.e.a cbange of vol
indicative of fear, grief Go, ), aud implying that it is no" g™
agaritat—Zt, ‘going by various roa 64," hoving many our
ero the Ganges, which is faqum ‘three-coursed’ (the Bret
coarse being through the Heaverly regions, the second over
the Enxrth and tho third along P&tbla or the lower regious).
Gufgh, boing borne on hie bead by Siva, is often represented
by Sansberit poets a exciting Pdrvat'sjealoury on that» ecount,
Gf, Modes, I. 1. Kuhjé (wboew real name wes Sairandbel ), the
fomale servant of Katia, seems to be meunt hero, She wes
deform-d, boing crooked of ben in three paris of the body.
Cf. avaccag det Satiaat feewarnt wasaR &e, Bu-P. X.
LXLIL, 3. While Rama and Ky shga were passing ttrough
tho main road of Mathur6, they taw her carrying unguents to
Keres, and asked her if ho would give those to them,
Readily accooding to their wish she applied the wnguent to
thotr bodies, Pleated by thi jnhna planted his feet on
hors, and holding her by tho chin made her straight. ‘Touched
by him she became the best of beauties ( gg-aeviianeul Sih



--- Page 230 (OCR) ---
6 [ Act 1.

fram). Sho thon being enamoured of him requested him
te nt ler house which he promised to doattr billing amps,
For farthor particalars soe Bh.-P. X, L, Oh. 7. 1-10,

Some understand this to rofer to Sarasvat{, but that
doos not seem probable, This and the epithet segizat
ory well taken with went. @ig—e. J. Mtg: is not
it implies a habitual act. eraragizst—(1) Nata-
rally erooked ( going in a sigeag or meandering way ), Even
if separated as enry, ste will moan the same as ear.
@) sragitst—uita si sf by intention or thought sizer
crooked, insincere; not honest in her professions. Cf, Mrich-
IV. 16. qeorqoso—Siva got the epithet sequs (here called
ome for the sake of the pun) on his drinking the poison
Halfbala, which turned his neck black. qg—Your hold
embrace, The Fig. of Spocch is sry.

P. 8, GL. 8, In this dl, Siva is reprosented an dosoribing
to hls wife Pérvat! ( Satf, now restored to him ) the soene
Daksha’s sncrifico when destroyed by him.

Allusion:—Dakabo, at the inatanco of the sages, gave bis
daughter Sattto Siva in marriage; but be was nover wholly recon
ciled to the uncouth figure and the loatiwome practices of
ton-inlaw. He once performed a sacrifice at which all the gods
‘exoopt Siva wero invited. He did not even invite his daughter to be
Prevent at tho ceremony, Satt, however, persuaded her husbsnd to
0. But on fading horself slighted and er busband grossly abused
by her father, sho wan exa
sucrifclal fire and perished. According to axother account, #
sat down in contemplation, fixing her mind on her husband,
sad relinguished her body derived from Dakabs, by generating

etnto it. For other particulars wee BhP.1V. 4, eapectally 24-271
ef. also Kam, I. 27, When tho terrible news reached Sirs, be got
highly incensed and wreaked dire vengeance ou Daksha. According
to one accoant he himselE went tothe escriice, completely destroyed
it, pursued Daksha who assumed the forin of « deer, and decapitated
him, According to different account he tore off «lock of his matted
bir and dashed it on to tho ground. From it sprang up the fierce
Virabhadra with « thousand arma. S'iva saked him to go, eccom-
panied by the Gapas, and to destroy Daksa be leo
bimeelf went there to ansist in the work of demolition referred to
in the above #'ioka.

Oonstrne:—araisht ret pe: wANS: HA: Peo: sao
areal: sagaagaisieen: siren om: vale | est a ore
eh eh Aad A: oH Rad eR BY RTA tox
srrere: fires Tg |



--- Page 231 (OCR) ---
Act I. 7

watet:—Kindled by, i.«. flory with, or glowing with,
wrath, itdi—e. Late er ge: sti Og fery. This ts
faulty becanse sq is an obscure word, and it is a bed com-
pound. Perhaps of is a misleotion for w. aerated: ©. L—
blinded, bedimmed, this will not do, as theides of overpowering
light is nocoseary to explain the putting out of the three fi
PaPr—o. 1. mg: doce not make good sense; for it shows the!
the glare of the eyes was not so powerful as to put down
the fires at once, apit—here used for @%, ‘those well-known.
Tt-cannot be taken as ‘these’ (g@tida: ), a8 Siva cannot be
supposed to be desoribing to bis wife the the de-
struction of the sacrifice at the timo it took place; for Sail
had burnt herself before that, aif eqa:—aete Stee eee
fai wi@: te. ng-+(% Unhdl; tho principal offic of fire being
that of conveying tho oblations offered to the gods; of. the Grati
afiget ® Yar. wa—Theve are (1) ardaem ( veuftiar fret
dew by weatrar dg@ oa: 1 Pap. IV. 4.90) or the sacred
fire perpotually kept up by s householder ( being transmitted
from father to son) and from which fires for eacriGoial purposes
are lightod, (2) streets (streq afteat gfe) in which
the oblations to the gods are offered; ( 3 ) afemifir oF the cere-
monial fire. ‘They are collectively called er. Of. A‘évalé-
yona—fiar at gaat gaia: GT aTeTeT: ale sreaaia. Bee
‘also Ms. II. 251.

sararat:—They were frightoned at the torriblo sight of
‘Virebhadra and the havoc wrought by him and the Gapas;
for the easy fright taken at such soenes by the priest
dadionrgdhawtorgirnt sgnfwenaara | Regh. XI. 25.

“Lit, ‘sncrificing at stated timer,’ 200 com, Here

‘Priests officiating at a sacrifice.’ Cf. seemed smmTaTaY
ere | a: ER wT eT w aeTieteria FAA: Ma, IT, 43,

‘Tho four chief prieste offcisting at a enoriice are @a; aE
omg end ed, At grand sacrifles, such us tho one referred to
tere, thore ate sixteen prieats, exch one of the foar principal om
faving three assistants; thovo aro (1) dar Serees, srarerg and
saree: (2) sere, teat, fea? and ware; (8 ) ate witeterer,
Sar and ary and (4) mga mere, sin ond der

sqva—mischievous, aatively busy. ‘Tho Gapas aro so by
atures ef. ar seer@te woreaaia, Kum, IIL 41. mA troop
‘of demigods called gays, who attend on Giva and are

Mperintendonce'of Gaels, one of the domigodh
uid number,  See.our mote/on



--- Page 232 (OCR) ---
8 [Act

Kum. 1.85. gevtqrer:—go fa8 (fear removes gi gente
(ft 1. Aue ie. of) a turban; zooferd ge: eloths worn
as turbans. gz fr, og to go, 1st Conj, )is the usual word, ag
is got by adding a to az (aigaqra: ). Sra: Gafen—As the
priests rauning about in terror were pulled by their turbans
thoy fell down,

THA celebrated Prajépati, one of the ton sons of
Brahm, boing born from his right thumb, and the chief of the
Patriarch; of: ereraranrgareamraraTate: Bh.-P. Seo Apto's
Dic. aei—Fiteously, ina manner to excite compassion. sath
#4, meaning ‘helplessly, miserably’, is better, This may
hotter bo taken with fagag.

‘wreEra:—Who began to langh.’ Siva laughed heartily
4 he thought of the miserable plight in which Daksha found
himself for his folly in insulting tho goddess and of tho easo
vith which he routed the sa sraera: ©. L—should be
takon asan adj. meaning ‘laughing loudly,’ see com, ‘This will
Alto do, sagra, whon a noun, means ‘a loud, boisterous Inugh?
‘nd is particularly applied to the load laugh vf Siva, Cf. nafiam:
atari wumearargere: Mogh. 1. 60; fafeaigera &o. D.sak.

The cor favour of the Si, ede or the Terrie. Its prwa-
vent mood (eardsrt ) in anger. Virabbadra fe ite material or
scvential Excitant (wraven fone). The Figure cf Speech fv sag.

51.4. fa—Prosperity to the Moon.’ fir in such caso
has the sense of ‘to prosper,” with the aditional sense of
‘salotation to’ implied. Of. K.-P, oraraita  aneere sufgealt
e, Oom. on I. 1. fgmmpuar:-the best of, illustrions, Brahma
ba} an ganrdaregedarea comp. gay is one of the words of
the exif class, which, coming latter in a Karm, comp, indioato
soellenes oF pre-eminense, Seo com. farar:—Thie implies
Previous trouble, and ite cessation is now wished for. ‘Tho
three statements in there two lines are very. significant,
They covertly refer to the chango in the religious belief of Sri
i Thus, tho triumph of the moon means

his strong bias towards Buddhism;

the homage to the gods implies the King’s belief in Brihma-
view; while fEaugra &o, is meant to show that the Bréhma-
‘Das would no longer be persecuted,

wamaea—aea (or wey) means the fruit of. tree, and
also corn; ‘rich in tho yield of fruit and corn of evory kindy?
Producing plentiful harvest, Cf. wnq teRdt @idemarTt

|
|



--- Page 233 (OCR) ---
Act I} 9

Mrich, X. 61, ‘The fulGlmont of this wish depends upon that
fof tho three provious ones. For, when tho Bréhmapas
pertorm the holy rites properly and the gods are well pleased,
there is timely rain; and the moon (tho lord of herbs
sirwifigit: ) shining properly, not boing obsoured by untimely
clouds, the plants thrive. Cf Bg. IIL, 11, 14, and sqwt aveat~
ins eamigeagateas | suigearemiae gieWeedr wa: gan: 1

wasq—Here ag is intrans.; of. amervit wahh &o.
Stk. V. 14; gif aoearsema Ge: &e. Ragh. V. 13.
having n body like i, a8 gladdentng ae, that of
the Moon,’ This is generally taken as an adj. to atqa-:
But there is tautology in this, ab a comparison with the moon
mpliod in togary:. It is better, therefore, to take weary?
as a part of the wish and to constras at-qwq: WANG: S%
(gladdening the people like the Moon by his person, and not
oppreming them like tho previous kings ), weg, ( airplay
lis power, reign gloriously ). Cf, the Sloka gAoq HAST sTaT
4&o, quoted in the Introduction.

Fig—aaren sem.

‘These four Slokas constitute what is called the Nandi,
‘About the genuineness of the fret threo of these there is no
question, as they are found in all the MSS. and printed edi
tions, ‘The fourth also seems to bo genuine, as itis found in
most of the printed edd. Even H. H. Wilson had it in the
MS, he ased for his translation of thie play. Agnin, it ia
possible that Harsha might havo written it to please the
people after his reversion to Brahmaniem, We cannot, how-
over, be very certain on this point,

P. 4, ateaeR—For tho definition of rt seecom.; arafier
ear seantifr adh fr. ary with aoc ( ot) and the fem, a. #5
some derive it as siraietenfean amqeifa Ags ex gH Teg: by
adding of ad (rauftearen.)s ae: Faret Bis,
‘The Naud forms anessential part ofthe theatrical prelimiaeries,

and is of four kinds :—aaepig(@et sir oareed mart aredt eq Oren
srestity en, Acoording to Bharata the principal events of the
Plot should be covertly indionted fa tho NAndt and thi is dove bere
tlao, ‘Thus the Brats, efereto Stgurika's guargerer by offering
to bim, aed other incidents connected with thet. Tae second

to Sigarihi's getting nervous in the presence of Vater ja
tnd his sizing ber by the hand, 804 some other incident’ ot tie



--- Page 234 (OCR) ---
10 [ Act 1.

second Act. See com. The third v1, bats sb the incl
third and fourth Acts, such as VAsevadatti’s irritation at her
husband's conduct, and the consequent obstruction ‘caused by er,
Sigurikt's lamentation in the words gi am de. p. 79 and the
confasion and bustle caused by the Ore exhibited by the magiclan
According to those who include the fourth «'. in the Nhndt the
third 91 refers to the incidents of the third Act alone, and the
fourth to those of the fourth, es, the viotory gained by RumapvAs
for tho King and the King's gaining the hand of Eatntvalt, ow
sppeating tn her true charnoter,

ion as to tho gfe the Ninat should consist of, or
ing of the term (for these see Righavabhatia’s com
on at 'tk, I. ) a asleas tothe general reeder and has ‘boon here
dispensed with.

P. 5. (areas) quarc—To properly complete this
stage-direotion and other similar one, eupply omg, weuft
or some euch word. The Sttra, continues to speak after
reciting the Nand,

Aa tho Stradhara is mentioned after the Néndl, the ques.
tion arises as to who recited tho Néndl, and, if the awe did it,
Why his name should not precede the benedictory 8'lokar
‘Tho answor is that the Sétra, gonerally recited the Nindl,
scoording to the precept of Bharata—qawrt: Gita &o. ( aoe
com. ); alto beosuse, he, ass Brthmena, was qualified to give
blowing. But his namo is not put rat, as nothing but
snepicious words can begin postic comporition, Again, it
seoms that the Sdiradbtra dia not astume his charaoter as euch,
‘until after the Nandi was recited. For a fuller discussion on
the enbject tee our ed. of Vik. or Sék., note on the word ; noe
lao Jagaddhare’s remarks in hie com, on the M&l.-Maah,

HIE—Lit, ‘the holder or regulator of the throad of
dramatic business ;” he is the chief manger who assigns
to the various actors the characters they are to represent,
instructs them and takes s leading part in the Prologue,

It in probable thatthe torm origtnally applied to the exhibitors
of puppetshows who sat bohind a curtain and made the puppets
‘move as they moved the atrings, and that the Indian drama ia
Prevent form ie a devolopment of auch shows. See notes to Vik,

srornfafireate (or oetips)—Horo aye has the sense of pro-
hibition (rem). ery means amplideation, prolixity; fr. Rese
+205 (srt); with wy (st) wo have emit: (extent); mark the difter-
‘sree botween she two; enret Prat sara: a aexey Rear: | Ak.



--- Page 235 (OCR) ---
ii

the same. Tho whole meant—‘onough of,
‘nothing is to be gained by the prolongation of the theatrical
preliminaries;’ cee com. Here sifafaeac is the sar of the
‘ya or fturafiewt which is understood, and thorefore tt
iqy. For it is remarked in the Nytsoddyota—e firar whioh
fs understood implies instrumentality just as well as one
actually montioneds 40 this is equivalent to greqrarera. fe
 wasa:. The constant uso of this expression in Sanskrit plays
shows that the prolix preliminaries were found to be tiretome
by the andionoos of lator times

avdteay—It sooms it war usual in ancient India to
coxhibit dramatic performances on tho ovcasion of somo fair or
fostival (a8 a gréat conclave of people was likely to be pre-
sont on such occasions). ‘The Spring festival, which may be
likened to the carnival or satarnalia of tho Romans, was
formorly oolobrated from about the middle of the bright halt
of Ohaitra to the fall-moon day, to mark the return of Spring,
when Kimadeva or the God of Love was worshipped a2 de-
soribed farther on. According to some, the soston commenced
from tho fifth day of MAgha called Vasentapafioham! and lasted
for two mouths, It is now identifed with tho Holi festival
which is oolebrated from tho fall-moon day of Phélgune to the
Sth of the dark half of the same month and in which people
of all grados of society mix and tak liberties with one another,
‘The Bhavishyottara-Purapa givos a detailed detoription of the
festival, for which seo Wilson's noto on this in his Hindu
Theatre, Vol. IL, p. 264.

sftyto—For Harsha, 00 Introd. @yet—Ra,te. fea, to shine,
originally meant ‘ shining, brilliant;? then it oame to signify ‘a
00? (ef. Lintin dows; it is used as a torm of respect and great-
oss after the names of kings; of. Vikramabkadova, Vikramadeva
&o. qraqvite—Gaining their living, subsisting, by the support
of the lotus-like feot of;’ a respeotfal way of saying “tho humble
vassals of? arqite—srad should better be taken with eqay;
sizi—such as has not boon displayed betore, novel, oxtraordi-
nary (and attractive). If taken with weg, the statement is
not correct. qa is the judicious arrangement of the various
parts and incidents ro as to lend them to a charming end,
‘The poet moans that he has borrowed the plot, but presented,
it in a novel way. oi

‘cearyeit—Properly the namo of the prinoem ‘of fiige and
‘he Heroine of the play; the same signifies the play’ of that



--- Page 236 (OCR) ---
2 [ Act I.

namo by tranferonce of an epithet ( agiaart ); see Sid,~Kan,
on adic rei Pag. IV. 8.88, The poot’s other play firazfirest
i similarly named after the Heroino, ‘This is secording to the
role aifeeragsrtiat ailaeifaftivemn. aeet—eoo Intro,
wiqtr—is a word by itself (srgeet afaaixé ); @ line or
series of” ‘The reading @A’A..._gar is bud, as the prozeneo of
gia prevents gat being syntactically connected with ai@er
it must be yea, walaa:—by way of being represented;
aolually staged. o@ifea:—osrnen CETHTETETAN. eT. RTE

sat—Lit, ‘with the thought of favour,’ i... with a wish to
favour us. Cf. amfeg et aifearga at serageemmanig fe.
Vik, 1.2. qurya—Seo com. ‘in duo form;? with striot
attention to rules; ie. in a faultless manner, oF ‘fally,? every-
thing as written being exhibited,

anacani—aver is derived by Bhénuji Dikshita as fas,
(tz. fm. the eye) to the eye, oF dr, (4 m.a lender) to the
eader, wed good, pleasing; hence (1) dress or (2) deooration;
it algo means (8) the tiring-room ( where tho decorations are
rade or the aotors attire themselves } and (4) the drop-curtain
(arvfi@1). sceat hore monns—Tho arrangement of tho tiring-
room (auch as the assignment of parts to the actors, giving
them instruotions as to constume, acting, and s0 on ).
raftran(®—p. p. p- of gat ona, with sq, to incline &o,; ‘inclined,
Arawn to or attracted. qraifra—thote who assemble in
tn assembly, the audience. ia added to a word
Ghoting eSabicatonsin tho toms od‘thoee who. anvmble
theres’ or earst gata efit those who Keep an assombly by thelr
pretence, farsra:—conviction, firm beliet,

Si. 6. faqe:—Having the skill attained by the obs
vation of the ways of the world and by the study of the
Sistras and good poome. Horo frguer also includes the idea of
afte ‘genius or pootio inspiration,’ as observed by Mammata;
of. afetiguar dtearasreartgme! K-P. 1.2. gratiech—
capable of appreciating morits ( otherwise our dramatic skill
will be useless ). Cf.

Msooe-And a8 you aro known
‘Tho first and bappiest hoarors of tho town,” &o. &e.
Shakespeare, Henry VIIL., Prologu
eift—e4 sfiawer naturally attractive or charming. The
word is generally used as tho Inter member of a comp., at
alent ko. meer —weaTat THT geaTTeT; King of
xy (for which seo Tatrod., Geography. of the

Play ). This was Uaayans,



--- Page 237 (OCR) ---
Aot I. J 18

Udayana was aking of the Tuner race, the son of Sabssrdntka
and the hero of a popular story, Hie geneology i thus given in the
argo —aifiera—afhg— aoe gale cree
» however, bo is auid to beth aon of « second
Sattutka, the 19:h in succegsion frorm Janaroojays, which seems to be
more probable. According to the Lalituvistara (a workin Sanskrit,
‘on tho life and doctrines of Buddha), he was born on the
same day us Buddha. Meblsena, also celled Chanda-Mahiaens,
king of Ujjay  duoghter, calied Vasavadatth, whom he
wished to give in marriage to Vatuarija. ( According to snother
scoount he wished to give her to a king named Suspjaya; in the
meantime VAsavadsttA saw Udanyans in a dream and boing ence
rmoured of him contrived to inform him of her love. ). With this
object ho enticed Udayans to his elty and kept him
Being eng
heart, and by the advioo of his minister Yaugundbardyans, managed

tooarry her off from her father. They wore afterwards toarried
in great pomp.

‘fe sftd—This is proved by the many references to
his mame of, staan gee odie deere ezareT
¢ Myich, IV. 265 sreupedizguavarertgnragre Megh. I,
305 weitere fagitat ceaursite ae Wid. T. 98; areegar TUT
Saree fist garremrigeara sraeea Mal—Madh, IL
awret—a is the pantomimio representation of situations,
gectioulation, acting, qd—himtelf and the band of actor
‘ho plural is not agra here, as the Sttra. refers to himedlf
in the 4th line (argredreware)- weg—a thing, a fact or an
item, Distinguish this from geq in omgiaqeaats supra.
ehk—ee repeated is to be taken asa Bah. Comp. by ge
wifes Pay. VIIL 1.9, and dissolved as que che, the
case-termination of the first being dropped by virtue of its
boing a comp. etma—is money and reputation. q¢—object,
abode or source. ga:—tmplies qarreat; ‘what then ( when ).’
zqTa—growth, development, excess. GyR:—has appeared
all together, is combined. gayal—favourable circumstances,
advantages or excollences, of. qiencarate fing ot SgEARI
Hitop. ©
$1, quoted in 8.-D. and D.-R, a8 an instance of ribeat (oF that
which attract the attention of tho sdionoe to the representation by
{commendation of the play &0. ), one of the agar of wrcfi w@ Ic
in defined as (vet vitower MEM Resear wrerdayt: we: worarfiew.
coreg! aRererezrs iat ager FTTAT A
"Phis introductory passage (from syurg to tho end of:this
1, ) is found almost the same in tho other two plays pf our
BHD



--- Page 238 (OCR) ---
ud [ Aot I

author, with some slight variations to suit the context; ¢. y
graeat for qertireett, foram or Mqer for qa ko. in Nag.
Bee Introd.

. 6. igdraat—menns here « song or songt accompanted
by instramental marie and dancing; a convert. stqftari—
‘the reader will see that this wish of the Sitra, is not falfilled,
owing to his wife not being in the proper mood for it.
Almost tho same oxprossion oogurs in Mud, I. araq—Tust’;
indicates immediate action. sy{—A wife is to be so ad-
Aressed in dramas. araq—Lit. ‘to mush’ (as to oome here ),
has in euch expressions the force of ‘please’ in English, Or it
may mesn ‘for a while’ (in the senso of si@fq). Supply
‘after this orazqaf, as the impersonal form is more polite than
tho active sre or qi. strlgy—Lit. ‘tho son of the venerable
one’ (i.e. the father-in-law), is the proscribed mode of
addresssing a husband in dramas, For the use of the Prilerita
by women, see Introd. p. 15,

om the use of the Prikrite by women and the minor cbarec-
terin dramas, itappeare tha, although the Pelrita dialects cae
into goneral nse abort the fifth century BO they were at fat used
ly women, oven of the higher classes, and by the uneducated people
generally. ‘Tho principal branchos of the Prilta were Migedht
fr the Kestern ‘branch, spoken ia Magadba (modern Bebar ) and
S'eorneent or the Weatern branch, spoken tn the Doab or the region
ietween the Ganges and the Jam

Freita:—frgede aifer"@i®, an orderto be executed, a task.
Te also. meant ‘a duty assigned to « particular individual’ ¢/.
anit & frirrart ee (constantly occurring in dramas ); 4
wag araPraty qr Bik. 1. &e. cenreefiqain—Here were by
Takshagé means ‘the representation on the stage of the ploy
called Ratnévali’ @qva—dress,

et—git. Of Markthi grft and Gujarati at. gfgar—Lit. ‘the
wilkor fr, gy-+the Upadi aff, q, there being no Guys. The
task of milohing the cattle was assigned to daughters in the
ly A‘ryan sootety (as they only could be safely entrusted
with that work ). Tho fem, affix, § is not added, as the word
belongs to the erenfy class. Sco Sid~Kau. on Pan, IV. 1, 10,
‘Yiska derives it as gfterr ( ono who is ill-placed ), or g feat
(plecod ata dintanoe from hor father's howto alter marriage),
Rareat—proporly, a region ceparated by a large river; honco,
‘a distant country (werramrt um uf arent (@g:). Cetr—means
hore a1rqwt, promised to be given, betrothed, srrenrfiy ® dee



--- Page 239 (OCR) ---
Act I. J 15

Even my own self is not perceptible to mo, I am not cognizant
of myself even (80 much beside myself I am with anxiety ).

P. 7. SL 6. iar &o—gty fr. fe-+orm ( the at of ara.
is changed to § after (& arrar and prepositions ; sr-atic, sti
&e, ); 400 com,

‘qeafe—oan, of wz 1 A’, to bappon ( sifimtt 2a Mél.-
‘Miah. I, ®) and not of ez 10th Conj. whioh has qrzaf@ ; rings
about, accomplishes,’ of. nzeq: eradienzaitt @ at w wot
‘MAl.-Médh. I, 14, Orit may mesn “brings in close contact with,’
“anites.’ afigefte—Zit, ‘with the face turned towards /
hence, favourably dispoted, propitious. The Fig. of Speech
may be simeqaratar. ‘This é1. gives a forecast of the principal
events, by referring to the roscue of Ratnivall from tho
waters of tho oo, and hor being brought from a distant
Innd_ and attached to tho Queen’s apartments.

AMAIn the post-sconinm, or tiring.room. ¥eaga—
CET HET GT: HEAR: 1 follower of tho solenco propounded
by Hex, an aotor 5 by transferrence of epithets aya alto moans
‘an actor,” a8 in afeetegare® ear: MAL-Madh, 1. qairag &0—
‘This epoceh of Yaugandhardyana from behind the soenes form!
tho first aiga or clement of Mubhasamdhi oalled guia or tho
hinting of the Bije or seed, vis. Yauga.’s attempt, assisted
by favourablo fate, to unite Ratndvalt with his mastor.

arrercrat—Tho faithful ministor of Udayana, over
devoted to his mastor’s cause, Wherever King Vatsa is men-
associates (Yaugandhardyana his ministers
is companion, and Rumanavat his general ) aro
‘afirert—tho part assigned to on actor in a drama.

‘avameetra—i, «. tho dross auited to the parts they had
to asrame, The reading aqaft sacra he, (sat TER
eft aes Berevaat by putting on tho dress suited to what
‘wo have todo next—see foot-note) found in the Oslo, od.
oos not scom to be original. It is not in the style of the
post, Again, srrareriia and siacgieeur are almost
pleonastio; for srrentmcta is sercaftermen. Thirdly, Aqva
‘apetra accords better with the provious az gerat aeay p. 6,

wearrar—aerraaf (that which introduces the subject
amattor) g(t fr. neg oan. tart (ga) added waft and the fem,
afl. sit, emieat oF the Prolude, slso called srger ( although
the former {¢ gensrally usod in plays ), is a dislogue, fall of
{ntoresting spooobes, between tho SAtradhira and ono of th



--- Page 240 (OCR) ---
16 [ Act I.

aotors or the actress, bearing on thelr own business and hint-
ing or leading to the inoidents immediately to be introduoed

See com, ‘There aro five varistios of meaiwat, of whioh tho
prosent is guiqure, s# Yaugandharbyana enters, catching up
the words of the Sitradbéra, Seo com.

whaae—qataa &e. Hero we hare the terrarg or the
cnsting of the seed, Seo Introd. p. 0.

P. 8 seqr—otherwiso (i.e, if the favourablonoss
of Fate bo not admitted ). Here Yau. finds the statement of
the Sates, verified in his caso, -@—The repetition of w
indicates great inoongruity or disparity betwoon two asser-
tions, Itis often used by Kilidésa see Ragh. I. 2, Mélev,
TUT. 2, Sik. IE. 18, &o, Pacqritero—-feeq 4 Hoe, ono who has
obtained miraculous or ruperhuman power such as figreaI7
eo. by the practice of Yoga; we erie: (authoritative )
iatement of tolling. ‘The sifgqr was that whocver married
hor would become an emperor, Bee Act IV. srfirar—tormally

aked, solicited,

Ferydeares—This wos Vikramabbha ; se0 Act IV. For figs
see Introd, ararry—a17 is any vehicle or conveyance ; here
fused for a ship ;e, 1. yuger meant tho samo thing. owitfta~
‘qrari—ahows that eho was fortanato enough to find s plank
ST cho moment sho rose up from water; 0. 1 eftrmTer:—who
fell into the water, e. J, (wmrer:—‘who sank in the water!—
is wot a good roading, and is probsbly o misleotion for
famar:. woae—e.t see a planks emerged —This refers
to the Sdtradhhra’s weag@ waiat: fl. 2 supra. attaredt
seo com.; aresident of Kaudimbf, the eapital of Udayana ;
gee Introd. duret—may moan (1) finding hers or (2) erarerect
taking care of hor and rendering assistance to her. ofSygrar:—
Bho was recognized as a priveess from the costly jowal-neoklace
the wore, and the merchact, being @ native of Kaus‘imbl,
Kkow that the marriage of the daughter of the King of Simbala
‘with hie master was being negotiated for by Yangandbardyana,
nd ao he at onco conoladed that sho was no other than the
prinoess of Sinhala and brought her to Kaus'émbi,

‘aet—The forementioned happy events sugured well
tor the Kiog, ama he is delighted to think that his objeot
‘would bo fulfilled now. eaur—In every way; hence, very
assuredly. ‘spgyari—Prosperity of every kind, ‘The pl. shows
that the King would get not only the princess but also suocess
in his campaigns oguinst his enemios, qaj-should rather be gat

|

EN ee


--- Page 241 (OCR) ---
Act IJ W

a the propor form of eng is not used before. ‘The uto of qag.it
to be justified by supposing her to be mentally present before
him. eaited—This he did to show to the queen that the
roaiden was not an ordiaary girl and was, therefore, to be
treated with epectal consideration. goi—Kor he knew that
thoreby the King would get a chance of seeing her and thas be
drawn to her. Horein wo havo the wfavurg, the onsting oF
sowing of the seed, (see D.-R. I.) which is developed here-
after as the plot progresses, We shall not, horestter, rofer in
the Notes to tho various tecknieslitioe of dramatargy in
connexion with thle, as they are given in the com.

aeqxi—So called probably from the long loose robe
ho woro (gorge: srearefif). ‘The Kafloh. is a character
peculiar to the Sanekrit drama, Ho is tho superintendent of
the inner apartments of kings, being a Brabmans, old, endowed
with a numbor of good qualities, and a clover man of business
Seo com. Bublrarya, it seams, was sont by Yeugandbarfyans
to the King of Bimbals with a request to give his daughter in
marringo to his master. wggferar—Var.’s presence at
Kaudimbi is necotsary for the identifcation of Ratnévall;
hhouce its importance in the development of the plot. eet
arufir—sift added to we bas tho senso of ‘indofinitenoss oF
indeseribability;’ the repetition of gd serves to intensify
the meaning: 20 the whole means ‘with grost difficulty.”
araaie—For tee seo Introd, eqoyq—Tho general of
Udeyana. omrf—Hore nrq means aTgeq; see com, so this, at
the end of a comp., means ‘for the most part, almost, nearly.”
ufti—ftr may moan—(1) dite ‘satisfaction’; of. wyterit
git Vik. 11, 8; & g@ qeane gine Nag. 1 6; or (2) BE
Hortitude,’ stability, he means—T feo! nervous about it,” as
suggested by tho Tast lino of the noxt él.

P. 9 SL 7. eqrft: &o—Construc: gq: 234 gaeEMTe
werent: gabdl steer or enrtea: efeear srienrarces Tee
ea areata? oft (now that the support of the hand is
thus given to it). qagrate—qagen aleo mesns the same
thing; of. stedtdagerr Ven. I. 21; featarruger Vik. p. 20.
Rae. |. RRHULAAWT ‘a8 rogards oucoone,’ hore Ferg must be
taken in the sonse of fare, o being added ai. Hear:
‘Acting of my own notion or will (4.¢. without the King’
kenowledgo and approval). This #1, is quoted in the D.-R, (with
the reading omré for eft) at an instance of qitearg,. one



--- Page 242 (OCR) ---
18 [Act I,

of the aiigas of Mukhovamdhi). fia qarfit—His endeavour
vwas to advance his master’s cause; hence he thould have no
oar, and yot he has it. ‘The Fig. ofSpesch in this fl. is sizam;
an aifvemarceres tramerniaequrreere | Sistrt Nigudker,

siPierme—Bome road nyt (adv. modifying: stftagras )
‘agrecably,’ sweetly,’ before this; but this is superfluous, as tho
idea is expressed by gq which follows. Again, it will have
to be construed with siffreeanra, which is not separate, bat
part ofa comp, gq—mellow, pleasantly sounding ( boing
Bontly beaten ). yxy—So oalled as it was originally made of
clay ( ag sTPREG ).  Wfte—wafi has a varioty of meanings:
it means (1) @ kind of song,’ thus defined-gamae¢ earfaar
walt Rance TE | aacswreeer aT zoe HUET AE eeu;
(2) ‘the clapping of hands? ( which is the moaning here, as tho
word wi already occurs in the comp. ); (8) ‘a mode of walking;
as in swafewarafter Vik. IV, p. 1455 (4,5) s00 com, omg—a
festival, fr. we garat and ot (orgory). This is the same
as the quiet referred to before. agtatd—greatly
enhanced, excessive (solobrated with great rejoicings), ‘This is
fully desoribed in Véts. Kim, (I. 5) wherein tho Oom,
romarks—agqageen: TTT TITATR. Fa—The king is so
addressed in dramas,

SI. 8. ‘Tho epithets herein aro paronomastic and apply
to both sitar and geHary, there being thus a verbal res.
Dlanoo between the two; the king is detoribed as coming like
Hq himself, eager to soo his own fostival. Pureae—(1) fore
war; ‘with regard to whom all talk about war is at rest); for
Udayane had conquered all his enemies ( #00 41. 9 infra, qed
faffraag do. ) and his subjects enjoyed the blessings of penoe;
@) fang body; for Madans’s body waz reduced to ashes by
Siva. chemre—(1) ri love, attachments waey FR THe Ste eT
tira possessed of the love of his subjoots; some take it to
moan ‘full of love,’ a gallant (a8 ahown by his private
life ); but that doos not seem to
attribute farm va will have no significanoe. (2) rf the wife
of Kéma; far ‘being always accompanied by Rati’, Seo
Kom. ITT, 85. sf in the frst oat may also moan ‘having
a liking fox)’ i.e, interest in, the rejoicings of the poople
Cafes, sg8 ).

mea PUR TaE—(1) By his good government Udaya:
hand seoured a place in tho hoarts of the people; (2) naturally



--- Page 243 (OCR) ---
Act I. ] 19

‘dwelling in the heart ; ¢f, the epithets qafaer, aaa &. fra-
wae—()—aaen name of the Vidtshake, tho King’s
‘constant companion ; (2) yeere the God of spring, who is
described af a constant associate of Kama; of. mgeq 8 74
wipwsiq Kum, 1 21; eget owt ot aveaniat new!
subst facer wre: ware: eaeraw W Siva-P, X. qe—is to be
construed as aetita ea ( sytew: ). sgeqa:—Ansious, eager.
Firarate—(1) fray beoause Inaugarated by himaclf or due to
his good rule; (2) colebrated in his honour. The Dat. it
used giged. Although geqe governs the Instr. or the Loot
(by afecteganat gérar =), crew doos not, as tho injunotion
SRTEReTaRM azareTasintT: interferes, spgefq—The Present
tente here docs not go against the p.p.p. sifwee in the
preoeding paragraph; for thore Yangon. saw him on the
terrace of the palace, and now approaching the road-side.

or tho figures in the 41. see com.; werrgure means the
similarity (—but in different wayt—) of a group at lottors (as
eq hero) ocourring onoe; Bey FasAeWeT TSATTARTT |

P. 10, qrda4—What remains of the business to be
sccomplished, eis, Ratnivalt’s unfon with tho King. This
‘rofers to the employment of tho magician, mentioned in the
fourth Act, for obtaining the consent of the Queen to the
match, Fremeng:—( fremaratia from wmrg_ 5, 0 P. with (@ to
fasten or fix, and af. ara) is an interlude, showing concisely
tho connexion between thore subordinate parts of the story
which aro not enacted on tho stago snd thoto to follow. It
may be in the form of « monologue ( as here ), or a dialogue
‘hich may bo carried on by low ( sft) characters who speak
Prakeit or by the middle ones (vu) who speak Sanskrit,
when it is called gra or pure, oF by the low and midale ones,
in which eato itis called fa or mixed. Seo algo p. 80, note
on tae.

fargaa:—The Vidi., who by the rales ought to be a
Bréhmana, is tho constant companion and trusted friend of
‘tho hero of a play, playing the same part towards him that
the female companion and confidante plays towards the
heroine, His business is to exoite mirth by his ridioalous
appearance, age and quaint dross. He assists the hero or king

iguos and is allowed not only fall liberty of

to the female apartments Ho is
thas more than the buifoon of the Western drama, He



--- Page 244 (OCR) ---
20 [Act 1.

variously named at Vasantake, Kuruma, Maitreya or 80.
His attempts at wit,” remarks M.-Williame, «which are
over very sucoetsfal, and his allusions to the pleasures of
the table, of which he is a confessed votary, are absurdly
contrasted with the senten‘ious solemmity of the despairing
hero, crossed in the prosecution of bis love-suit. ‘The abrewd-
nose of the heroine's oonddantes nover seems to fail them 5
‘but the clumsy intorforonce of the Vidisheka in the intrigues
of his friend only serves to augment his difficulties and
sooasions many an awkward dilemma,”

51. 9. tret—This technically includes tho seven
elements of a kingdom mentioned by KAmandaka; of. raHt-
read st gta vet get) reateeit cant civageak a
rq—worthy, fit; the fines lying in his ability and
coneummate statesmauship. aftya—efe a1, fr. et friend
ship and g1 to go-+or (@:). axer—oalamity, trouble; fe. gay
with saat (.) added wafer or wit,

rivera gar—Here the post evidently refers to Vasara-
atta. He also does tho same in Priy.; of waiters werd freas-
agate gay ator 1 sreeqammarett &o, IIT, 0; also. 7.
Kalidasa in his Megh. also calls Vass. the daughter of Pradyota
(t00 Megh, T. 88 }j and the commentators of Megh. suy th
aii was another namo of Ohapdamahtrons, king of Ujjayini,
whore daughter Visa, roally was. According to the Kathiear,
Pradyota was tho King of Magadha, quite difforont from
‘Mabisena ; snd his danghter’s name was Padmévati who was
given in marriage to Udayana at his own desire See Kathésar,
XIII, 10, 20. Seo Introd. gqeqara:—Tho spring tenton,
to favourable to enjoyment. The King might wall rogerd
the Spring as coming to serve him to complete bis happine
of wa BHT GURY UhrgdenTTR | aTGUTREOAT-
aformt eagt wyrfeattney a Ragh. 1X. 24, Some take this
(at this does not team to be intended-) as an adj, qualifying
x, moaning ‘one behaving liko the Spring’, i, «, contributing to
pleasure; 800 com. xf@—for theso eix reasons, apr4—as much
as he likes. wa ga:—Cy. with this Yangan.'s faoragiews-
ailarg. This il. establishor tho character of the hero
fivafna, Of. with this Nag. L 7, and Thrapidw’s description
in Kad. a ra mgaias fafores ewedieret ada geaTTTe
fear gaye ecareartieg afer AO Beta MUTT
Sagar Rafertig:... cere eRETTE | p. 98,



--- Page 245 (OCR) ---
Act LJ al

P. 11, st ame o,—Tho king is to be addressed as
‘aaeq or Cr by the Vide; of Bharata sqeaqafere a1 #tarse
mftaia: | Regetor &e. et Part —Vii
view, but then, as suits
may rather be looked upon
such a supposition in the words yea w &e.

aaaera arrea—Cy.a similar passage in Nég.:—yt gt a:
Sat rear: Greeeenes | ore ro a(R Ree RETREAT |
Aaa: | aWaeeT MTT! p. 47. mTeoTEgaTEA #. 1.—of me, a
poor Brébmaps. For comp. soc com. ag primarily means a
papil; a added to it implict commiseration; ‘a poor or helpless
pupil’ and then secondarily ( by Lakshané ) any poor person.
‘Tho reading argmes is proferred because the Vid. is not
likely to speak disparagingly of himself, capesially when he
was complimented by the King in the way mentioned above.
assug—it spoken; although the root q>q according to the
Dhatupatha moons ‘to speak or confer in private (apraftarea ),”
often used in plays In the sente of ‘to speak.”
Yarex &o.—The three long compounds ending in gggerea,
siifora: and gorey aro adjectives qualifying aqantveerer. Wy-
wm de.—For comp. seo com. my is wino prepared trom the
flowers of Madhika ( Bassia Latifolia ), sufettore
young women. eaarg:—voluntary scising #7 yi
tarily seized; qualides armeaa: (ougiasardt esr ).
form arg in the senso of gx, although usod by Kélidéan ( 0
aes exingfifewarg Kom. TIL. 7) is anomslons ( although
Mallingtha finds s defence for it; se0 our note ad loe.), 88 92
(a) is not.availablo, Some cay errubaraigy ( by adding si
to mg.cau. uaed in the primitive senso ). It is better to read
etary; wo get scent ug: by adding six (st) to ag. ai¥, exeig-
aii may also bo taken with wep-ayringes taken in their
hhande by the ladies of their own accord. srgay—uyr a eyriuge;
wie age, @ belug added ert. Probably horns porforated
fat the ond were originally used as syringes. omgreqea dan-
ing by reaton of being strack. arrt—a citizen (as opposed
to mre a rustic), henco, one woll-verted in love-mattors;
a gallant.

waqranyn—o. 1. eqeqrg menns ‘bonten oraselesly” (Hi
ebooked ). V1. qqW monns ‘well-rounded,’ well-shapod. aie
—n§ (beating or friction) anf si@; « kind of Mridaiiga (exer,
tays Nigudkar Séstei but that doos not seem to be tutored
hero, aa tho més spoken of wore carriod about by men walking



--- Page 246 (OCR) ---
22 [ Act I.

through the streets and wero sounding loudly ). emf: sera
(400 06m, ) grontly deepened or swelled by; the word hero may
be aqrar swelling arestrained (aqd 7m a fastening; henoe
restraint or check weareca:) oF gaTa: (of axtaa fecgaPrar
‘Sfreeafieges: Uttar, TIT. 6); in this case oxplain-sgat
rarer: Sq; arm is both w, and fom.; when fem. it optionally
samumes the form qrat by wrgmreamreuatenre t Pan. TV. 1, 18,
Or this may be taken separately; ofa: aqirasiater ea
rer &o, qed—here, a kind of song, cearge—Tho
outlets or openings of stroots, qzqrg—a kind of scented
powder (called ordig or grin Marathi) of a yellowish-rod colour,
Frafta—From feay m.e yellowish-red colour; feort: gana
cut Protea. 1. Rrendigya is a fep-formation ; arfteer
Reni gout cer erie. gliweT—Charmingness ; Arar we
SAR eft afiat: charming gey are: asftwar. The Gual « is
fudded by the rale Ryerfearet (and not by gee }j 40 we have
Bai: also,

P. 12, gifé—siie my menn—(1) extremity, limit, so
that ocr gi@ is the farthest limits or (2) exoons. “eareaifeeah,
Ha PeaerTt:? fe for.

Si, 10. Freraaita:—frewata ef free: fr. ata, to go-+s
Care 8); Fer qe Rrerer:—tho same as czUTe. oftg—e
collection or heap of; here, handfuls of. EW>—gEH safron;
aig powder, dust, itc—reddish. syeafreferéi-—which have
caused the crests ( or the heads) to bend low on aocouat of
thoir weight (implying that they were worn in a thick mass ),
fyerd:—the wreaths of the Aloka flowers ( see com. ) which
ro of reddish-yellow colour. Some take fbfsere to monn ‘the
Jollow grezm flowers.’ Tho idea in that the upper parts of
the bodies of the people wero yollow with the glitter of the
gold-ornaments, whilo their heads wero yellow with tho thick
mass of the ASoka wreaths. efareirat: ». Nig, State}
explains this as wt geqrort afta et(@ Bet Grek: sirdid: SP-
i: ‘wreaths of tho Adoka flowers which omaments
to the heads’ &o, But this is not vory satisfactory, It will,
perhaps, bo etter to take iar in the sense of thoad-dress,?
Mr. Godbolo takes ‘fu: in the sonso of “gallanta’, amorous
pertons (fr. féfierra Cupid )-by gallante woaring garlands,

which’ &o. But this docs not direotly add to the «ate
of the city.



--- Page 247 (OCR) ---
Act 1. J 28

‘aerfreawo—qq includes the idea of both, the ormmamonte
worn by the people and their dresses, So heavily wore the
pooplo loaded with gold-ornaments and so rich aud mmagnifeont
were their costumes, that the collective wealth ef the city,
estimated from theze, seemed to exceed that of Kubera, For
tho somewhat extravagant desoription hero, ef. Shakespeare's
Honry VUIL, Act, Scone L—
“ Ponday the Preuch
All clinguant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Bhone down the English; and to-morrow thoy
Made Britain India; evory man that stood
Show’d like « mine, ‘Their dwarfish pages wore
As chorubins, all gilt: the midams, too,
Not wd to toil, did almost eweat to bear
The pride upon them,” &e. &,
uragey—gold, so called from its being suppoted to be
found in the mountain qagen. gavfar—Wholly yellow,
yellow all over. ‘Tho atmosphere was yellow with the pow.
der thrown all round, while the atrests were yellow being
thickly crowded with the people als
81. 11, qreraen—a fountain, eam —continuous, uninter.
rupted. ‘The @ of wa is optionally dropped before aq and
fea ( by wat a1 aie: ); 80 we have waa also, g¢—a mass oF
quantity of ( as the idea of fow is exprottod by aa). ga—
covered over. qéa:—this goes with «gt. arexfené—hiary
or close troadings (by the fost ). ayui—is better taken
with tegen. arpt—neerart amUt a tpscions yard; the
a is ohanged to or, as it is a sign, by tho rule qévaredqrarg,
‘gqrre—See com.; ‘moving unrestrained, treading at will;
or boisterous. agr:—Young women in high glee; or dranken
women, aite—Tho reading warey is bad, as it is generally
applied to the skull-bone, or the portion of the skull of a dead
body; and ovon if it bo made somehow to mean ‘the forehead,’
the rhetorisians would find the mreqartg in that,  Geqt——
Mado of or dyed with vormilion. -qearqra—Properly,
the sottings of the feet on the ground; hence, secondarily, the
foot-prints. gt: gfd—The pavomont or paved floor in
front of the court-yard. ‘Tho two words may also bo taken
compounded, Tho pavement was oompletely reddened by
‘the treadings of the people as they moved about with theif
‘wet soles carrying the red paint dropping from the checks ot”
the women walking with wanton steps ;

low as described above.



--- Page 248 (OCR) ---
Bry [ Act I.

P. 18, gfegry—Very clover (in amorous sports )j
skilled in that basiness. effewre—Tho hissing sound ( lit, the
emitting of the sonad get) eauzed by a eensation of pain &e.;
of. ray aera meat: Uehewraraay | Vik. LV, 21, archer
f courtesan, a harlot; q7¢@ multitude’, with any word signi-
fying ‘a woman’ added to it, has this senso; «. g. ar¢eit-

Sl. 12. eareqanrt—The Vida. sets the attention of
the King to another quarter where the courtesans were sporting
with amorous persons, ‘The dense cloud of the scattered
scentod dust, not being mixed with saffron, added to the gloom
of the approuching evening, and the King, looking from above,
could seo the people but dimly by the glitter of the gems they
‘wore; and the scone appeared to him like the one prosented
by Péttla, which is said to bo perpetually shrouded in dark-
ness, with the Nagas moving about. ‘Tho Nigas, according to
one scoount, are semi-divine beings, having « human form with
tho hood of a serpent rising bebid their neoks (200 our ed. of
thy Nég., noteon the word aimeraeprp. 18), The epithets mele,
lois, came, and the punon yay givethe potnts of similarity.
ifrfegaet--(1) ornaments containing jowels, (2 ) tho goms
(in their hoods) serving as ornaments. gemmore—{ 1) with
the hood-like syringes raised up; (2) with raised hoods

‘at—The ase of the Acous. here is somewhat questionable.
‘Tho poot seem to follow the general rule nftghamaeeratd &o,
Pip. I. 4. 52, i. in tho ouse of verbs. implying ‘motion,
knowledge? &. ( te A. G. § 44) the subject of the primitive
vorbs is pat inthe Acc, eate fn the causal, But Bhattoji
Dikehita and others hold that the addition of the Varttike
‘qijsq? implies that the word g/& in the Stra refere to verbs
implying knowledge of « general kind, and not of a particular
Kind such aa mraeaatia, sausermTa &., and will not apply
to verbs like aves Ws must say mreaft, carcalt, Wate. Some
detond the Ace, by saying that Pataypjeli allows the ware
cei to encat whon ho says eaeaedir ( iter) AUER: WORE
(eo Bhisbya on Pég. 1. 8, 67 ). eaeaeie amaem gers @ UT
(ef aR mrenaaraige amie Mera Tattvaboddini. eercata—
Thore is somo grammationl inacouraey hero also, As the King
merely thought of PAtéla at the sight before him, we should
expect the form grew. cica(@ Is the form when the sense it
‘makes one yearn after a thing,’ é, ¢, when eq is used in the

|


--- Page 249 (OCR) ---
Act Ie) 25

of amare or gtpoatyie rem (and not (qr merely),
‘Tho King could not havo got a longing for a thing he bed not
actually seen, Porhaps the poct ured it for the sake of the
metre. Itis a woak defonos to say that the King longed to
oe what appoared like PAtsla and so bad grwvzt,

nyre—An adv. comp. (Ig unsteadily, unevenly; ef,
agitinigheratigaizgteaam &o, Mil-MAdh. VIL, p. 152,
autre V.L—ander the Infuoneo of passion.” memeuite (nq.
ata gun HETEMT AeA: BE) TeeRT VI —bearing the eppesrauce
(4g) of one under the inflaenes of love. gerarheta—with
sgectioulations indicative of the Spring-fostival. sifted v. J
—in a novel or strange manner.

PL 14 faatiee—feedi fee kind of Prékrite aong
adapted to musio, It consiate of four feet or quarters, with
18 métrés in esch, Ibis of four kinds, for which tee com.

SI, 13, The southerly breeze, or the wind from the
Malaya mountain, is invariably described by Sanskrit poets in
connexion with the Spring; ¢f. Kum. III, 26; an, as it excites
passion, boing cool and charged with the fragrance of the
sandal trees in which tho mountain abounds, it is called the
‘Messonger of Kima.’ Comp. with this the description of
Spring at the beginning of the Sth Oh, of D.-K., Parvapibiks,

‘Grwmi—Tho g in this and in the next dloka is added earif,
merely for rhythm. gyeifaa—‘made to possess blossomsy?
‘00 com; it may aleo be taken as the p. p. p, of the can, of
the donom, from aye (gag sree gwaTIA) by adding
a (#4g). But then the intended sanse is not got directly,
V.1, qgefitere is explainod in tho com. gge—Tho propriety of
‘qi is this: —As it was the beginning of Spring, the south-wind
hhad caused many of the mango-treee to blossom ( and not all
yot ). Gav. J for gg—is not good, for that would moun that
‘tho breeso caused only the shady mango-treca to blossom,
Fafufeae—This it did by reminding them of the Spring
toaion, which was tho season for enjoying the company of, and
not for getting angry with, thelr hasbands. Cf. for a similar
thought zara aramd wa Taka gt wet at wa 1 GUEATAICas
PRAT wTEAA HA eT MEAT uw Ragh, 1X. 47; of, alo
Kum, IL. $2.

Sl. 14. Peanfmre—Qualifies geftari:; ‘through whom
tho Adoka and Bakula troos hava come into blottom.’ , For
women causing the blossoming of trees, so further, notes on
Bm 3



--- Page 250 (OCR) ---
26 [ Aot 1.

41,18, cHyaay—may mean ‘a crowd, a maltitude;’ or Het
(Company, anion with). Ra gqeRaws ak endaa’ game:
‘The faaras meant are thosethat are absent. geafesafratew:
. L—This compound is clumey, It must be taken as faqhee
fiednt aeeieae:, the uefa of firge being explained by the
comp. being taken a8 ono of the qrargrmni class. gfaqraare-
Beng allected by groat longing they aro unable to wait longer,
areqft—feols unonsy, pines away. Cf. mrdepuatefeagieace-
Seareadi@ | Mal-Madh. I. 15. Som rest grea (arr)
‘wander about? (hoping to meot their lovers ), Nig, 8, who
reads aretsaitaRew:, takes this fl, ea continuation
‘of the precoding one (tho two forming a grq) and
gives a vory ingenious explanaiion of the different epithets,
‘Ho makes it mean:—Tho touth-wind, which has caused tho
‘Bak. and Aéo, trees to blossom, which brings together lovers
pling for each other’s company ( aeefzaran & faumaisa Bet
Brow erate 1 ear Sra ARE eu | ree Ta: ), Which
makes separated beloveds unable to wait ( sfama% sash:
Wr) and which makes yousg women long for the company of
their husbands ( ait uftammantor fear: ureh: areal:
mies ards: | TaeTTCERTIM Frome | gent eTds:
yates ), causes trouble (aaurgrastfeacud: ). But tho
Siatri himself condemns this intorprotation as requiring
a great deal of twisting and straining and as containing the
fanlt emrmgaregra and then interprote it in the way we havo
done. These two dlokas are in the Dvipadi style. Tho
following is a Gil

S115, genie —guito eurmeitt agit possessed of
roftness, soft, i.e, eapable of being picreed by the flowery
arrows.” aaqqat:—which havo got toope for action or access,

P. 15, aiteree:—interest in, ardour or passion for,
sport, agitsnarat Praft: wave e. Z.-Hlro frie: is the predicate,
gt: Sige: FRIt. We have dropped ayy as it is the fini
that is described in the next Sloka, sitgl—as two maids only
‘re introduced here, wo should expect the dual (instead of
‘the’ plural sqrat ) in the King’s speech; 10 the general term
‘store bas beon protorred hero,

61, 16, eteaa—should botter be taken with every line,

disordered, dishovelled. As the braid of hair got
Toosened, the garland tied round it slowly dropped down. ‘The
post fancies that tho yr»! was grieved, ns it wero, to love the



--- Page 251 (OCR) ---
Act Ie J a7

beauty imparted to it by the Gowers, targre:—the luxuriant
hair; a Nitya-samésa, qr, whon forming the second member
of © comp., implicn execllence (e.g. tram: ); and at
exgollonoe lies, in tho onto of hair, fn ite abundance, it means
‘s collection or mass of,’ qi: gerey gene Sesrerat: WWE |
Ak. grat also implies ‘cousure,’ depreciation, as in Fareartt:s
aura: &e, aftarerr:—efte p.p. p. of efi, 1 A’. ‘to bo intoxteated
or drenk.? feqeraé—feam itself hes an intensive force; at
‘sdds to the intensity or greatness. ag and qx are sometimes
thus added to imply greater excess, as in giafer: Beam:
sam; says tho Kiviki—ogr — rwteat ge wet Reeae
aaifeartusrarcee: ead wel. Fe meeRt—ory with a very
great force, 4, give rite to an anuaually loud jingle. arge—
Thoro is also a pan on thit—Thay fall at her fot to implore
hher aot to dance with auch violence, egeq:—trregularly
tomed oF thrown about, sstgweq—continuity, uninterrapted
succession, of the jerks or quakes. Cf. aepritsedtsft diate
aftersc: wert giifty Vent. I, 22. tatty wit eeq—The
necklace, being itself thrown about with violence, struck
against her bosom in order to induce her not to tread so
carolenly and violently. Bat this {t did, fancies the poots
painfally. eae &e.—nt implies foll development*
efiqmy—the iden is a favourite one with Santkrit poets; of:
safSear Free eraeat ho. Kum, TIL. 24. emupagrs—ady,
modifying swear,

caret aqafeacrat ». | —aftfend wonfesnters aft oftere
tho Joins, the waist; sq: afte wifi: who have girded up

thelr loin, é. . busily ongaged in dancing. arafwearf—do
honour to it by taking part in it.

P, 16. garg—Zit. ‘ono whore hopes aro destroyed? ( on
account of his folly, wickednets &o.); hence a fool, a wicked
man, qog:—a kind of sugar not perfestly dried, and used In
jumps, It is finer than mreqi?a~@r (granulated suger )
but less refined than qréur. amdistita—ef. the Markthi witera
mark that the Prakrit hasno Atmanepads, airear: fraet—
bears testimony to tho Vid’s oxtrome fondness for odible
This trait of his character is often referred to in Sanskeit
plays; of, ge wouttewants efter erat (arfiat Vik. IT,
p. 70 (and tho King's romark on that, vfs. qittartweanay
alate ua: 1), fi Maweriterarg | Bek. Lp. 46.

P. 17. qat—A particle of addross used in the case, Of
low femalp obaracters, such as grits, WE &o; 800, gom. p, 20,



--- Page 252 (OCR) ---
28 [At

It may be used, as hero, also by low characters when addres-
ting eaoh other, xsaf'—ufest is umally translated into
Sanskrit as af. It is e rospootfal form of address adopted
by servants towards the Queen. aqrataaft—and feargait are
polite ways of saying “ells, informs, aays,’ though sometimes
thoy may have their propor senso also, When a person in a
# euporlor position ing to his subordinate, the verb
sargrrzg it used; while, when « person of an inferior rank says
something to his or hor tuperior, fia is the vorb used,
qremg—A comp. with aluk of tho Gon, termination, at
censure is meant, ‘The Vid, says this, out of bumosr, to
plenso the King. geaarq—Tho Abl is eaagit; ‘having set
aside or surpassed? (atfjer ), soll, a festival more welsome
than tho ono therealready wa
evftaararat—trom eviey (an indeo, metning ‘a blessing’)
aud ey oan. and sea (gz) rat; etieT Tad ova that by
which ono {+ mado to ubter the word grftt, & «, pronounce a
mans is

Blessing. ‘The usual form of address to the Bri
‘afy weaisiaarg;’ to which they reply strgeqa eta. It
may also bo explained as exiy gegen are exienarat (eat,
added qr) tho pronouncement of a blessing; aematzaner by
adding (4) which then disappears by the rule gomtgsreat-
Reval greet: | Varttika (not noticed in the Sid-Kau,) on
Pag. V. 1, 110. Such gfeqaraa is necessary on all auspicious
cocastous, mecording to tho Susitl vgsa aagendaiigona
exter area 1 eS tty ergeR earargTTAA ul. The Prakerit
Sifters is also rendored into Banskrit as eqferarat (often
shortened into qraq, Marathi qyor), though eqray is better;
of. grams, arate &o, It is a present of n small
quantity of rice, « coconut, a piece of cloth &e., or sometimes
ot ewsstmeats alone, with Dadshing, and is given to a
Brthmapa (oF to & woman whose husband is living) on such
oouasions as azarfest aa, Hearn aa, HaTaERTT ge,

P. ABCy moaas floral juice or honey ;

tho abundsnce of fowering plants init.
Raaareqre—The mountain Malaya is identified with the
southern portion of tho Ghats, running from the south of
Mynore and formiog tho eastern boundary of Travancore
Iti specially known for its eandsl trees and cardamoms,
Tei arated from the Sahya mountain on the north by the
Canara Hills. It is reckoned as one of the Kula-Parvatas,



--- Page 253 (OCR) ---
Act I. J 20

qrear—s kind of mango-treo known for the fragrance of Ite
Diossome waich attract bees (see Rogh, VI. 69); it is therefore
8 favourite haunt of lovers. Tt is probably ealled ggasrt for this
reason (ag HI Hara Kethia). sxtefta—is vocal music mixed
with instramental musio; hero tho latter was furnithed by the
bum of the bees. egfagel—This reading is preferablo to eam
fs it botter exprosses its attractiveness, gat simply means
‘resounding with.’ ogffargi—It has shown its regard for
you, on your coming to vieit it, by farnishing a canopy and by
providing musie for your reception.

P. 19. 81,17. Oonstrue: gy ff srgar agwey ry eae
gmerivati: fea’: aut fae fexa:, eB: geilifeek: erfeag-
saendiongn: ge: awmntergings: nares: qoea: sft ger
Bar et wiier | Ryaay—Thero isa pun on the word mys (1)
Wit: neq: the time of tho vernal reason; (2) mya: TER: contact
with wine. sqq—shooting or branching out (when inthe
procors of formation }; heres the oompariton to tender leaves,
Chanaedtig gag lestareg tiling guigriegd ed
Peg qrqaeraie mgqey uw Rach, XI 13. amt fiat fe,
—The redness of thio tenéer leaves is compared to the ith
of wine. Cf. merrenie awvar gaat (next 1). e—indistinct
but aweot. wiar—tho sportive act of, wira:—(1) moving
backward and forward; ( 2 ) reeling.

waft ©. L—Oonstroe: sift gan maxegAear site mer
War et eene | aguaye—new CC My fr by tho liquor
in the sbapo of ( the influerco of ) Spring j or (2) hy the wine
of the julee of the Spring flowers. ‘Tuis reading is bad
{tis dificult to assign a meaning to wifea; for, if we take it
in the sense of who (unstendineet or staggering ), that idea
in alreedy contained in qufva:, It it be taken to mean geewar
(she whirling of the brain or exeitrment in which judgement fs
suspended ) or intoxication, then there is tautology with sar
(aenaat meq aqtes gee ). To avoid this dificulty gq must
be taken as constituting an gum the trees being worked up
by the intoxicating inflaance of the Spring appear like drunken
people. But this is to destroy the beauty of the sioks,
Agoin, wii does not account for the red appearance of the
treos, although it explains tho other two actions,

61. 18, qogqdaray:—Tho wine sprinkled over the
troos in mouthfuls by women to causo them to blossom.
‘ureat—in soonted as it wore (as the troes had to drink ik with



--- Page 254 (OCR) ---
| 80 [ Act 1.

i thoir roots ), Wine is often doseribod as being flavoured with
| the portume of fowers beforo it was drank. Of. gefuaracenaa~
‘warg 1 cfg FfsieytgreTt: ko. Ragh. IX. 36; also Sis, X. 8
Caaareaearegrtt &,), ‘Tho reading qed found in Jtvh-
od, fe vitlated by arcamire or volgariem; seo Depdin’e
Kévyad. 1. 05, Or wo may separate omg gqas oe ga( eee
com. ), taking ogy asan adj. qualifying g4. As soon as the
root has wine supplied to it in mouthfuls, it is covered (areq®)
with a shower of flowers, agrar g@afare &o—The
implication is that as goon ss tho women, exbilarated with
wine, treated tho Ohampaka troos with their gentle and
dexterous smiles and thus satisfied their oravings, the latter
‘st once put forth flowers. sraitarqrate—The Ajoke requires
to be strack with their fest by benutifal women to make it
Dlosom. Of. wan we: Sqaraiite: esrarayas eaeTi | TTT

| aftager arqttott debeferBaegger u Kum, IU, 26,

For the pootio convention ( gitar ) mentioning certain
trees as blossoming under certain conditions, see the al. gtoit
xvi, &s. quoted in the com, fia —adv.s (titer wt Ger
eaeTar 5 oxoossively, grestly.

P, 20. ergytira—.
not habitual, we have the Ps
aegis we should got the A’tm, as in Yewwer ager.
qaeRTT—The meterials of worship, such as flowors, rubbed
sandal, okshatés, fregrant powder ( Bukké), &o, Praea:
According their ranks or positions. firreatte—may moan
(1) with flowers thickly grows; or (2) ever blossoming.
arimnftrat—A kind of double jssming, with large and fragrant
white flowers, Oa sooount of its beauty and frageanoe, its
flower is regarded as one of the five flowery arrows of
apid. arapres—out of tho proper time or season ; the sonse of

particle is agerer hero, srargar—meuit eft
(folly believing )j tr. ag+urtsngasdded Saft ergsit™.

P, 21, eqrermi—Sea Intro, p. 8. arg: aftaraea—By
‘after she rofors to tho servants that had accompanied her ; ahe
means that they should hav

ety &e.

sked Sigatiké to stay behind.
Ever sinos Stgarika was committed to her oare by
Vie, had taken osro to Koop her away from
the sight of the King ; but her prosenoo now alarmed her; for
she feared that her superior charms and youth might eaptivate
‘the King and thus raise a rival to her, Sho, therefore, asks



--- Page 255 (OCR) ---
Act 1.) 31

Sagarikt, under some protext, to go away. oqer(tt—For the
comp. #00 com.; ‘in the power ofanother,’é, .,notin a position
tolook to another's business. meqeniiaafts o. L-may menu
(1) when the servants are inthe power of intoziestion; of (2. 7¢
srgrrfin not dependent on me, hevingbeen given liberty to-day.

tieiiret—iat Within the roach of or cognizable by the
senses; from at+Se+5+(q: )j seo com. gite—within the
rosch of vision.

P. 22, gitwR-undt cere, the whole body of servants
q:—Howover, on my part. Rfqr%—Thie resolve on the
Part of Sige, defeats the object of the Queen, She sees the
King, is improsted by his beauty, and love for him germinates
in bormind. Thus we have here qari, one of the aiigas of
Muthaandhi. aya—net gi te zea; hore tho image of the
god of love, Prad. was tho son of Krishna by Rukminf. He
was Kéma re-born by the grace of Siva moved by the lamenta-
Mons of Rati, his wife, Seo Kum, VI. 42, Hence he is
spoken of as one with Kama, He killed the domon Sambar:

P, 28, 61, 19. —Tho bow-staft of Kama consists
of flowers ( whence his names gyawraa &e. ). Prata—(1) By
means of a vow, #uch as the observanco of a fast &o, Frawey @
aot frernmegaraag | Amara, (2) By regularity, as required
(‘that it should easily bend), qr—thows surprise. gyeq-
‘affrmr—Applying saffron with the fingers, exgerg: 6Go
GETaerTTerT: V2 has been eooidontally omitted from the
foot-notes, apedat—Wilton cays on this:—

According to Bhavishyotiara-Purdya, the worship of
Kamadeva was instituted by Sivain pity of the fato to which he
had confined itn. On the thirteenth of Chaitra the worshipper
having bathed was to adoro the portrait or the image of Kimadeva
citber in person, or, as in the present instance, in one of his mani-
festations, attended by hiawives Rati and Pri, hie frfend Vasents
swroprosented in a grore of Avok troes, or placed in the abada of
‘one of them, with €owers, froite, and perfomos. It was in a gro
of An‘oks treos that Kama ineucred Siva's wrath, whence the
tion of that tree.
to the god in Tithi-Tattea.

ta! Son of MAdbava, Kandarpe, the fo0 of S'ambara, lord
of Rati, glory to thee, tho mind-engendered, tho subduar ofthe
whole universe | wGlory to the destroyer, to’ Kéme, the ambodied



--- Page 256 (OCR) ---
82 { Act 1.

form of the god of gods, tho agitator of the carts of Brabmt,
‘Viabgu, Siva and Indra!”

P, 24. 81. 20. geam—now, fresh, aaqq—(1) a bath;
(2) the act of being sprinkled over with. fefarn—bright,
transparent. Itis woll known how a bath, just after itis por-
formed, imparts aglow of brightnese and freshness to a fair
complexion; (2) clean. aitgracrere—(1) garaeard Slee Uo
a dyo propared from the Kusumbha fowers (which aro of a
bright yellowish-red colour ) ; or it may mean ‘saffron-colowr”
Ba wat: (charming )egea ( Arsbing forth, looking bright )
sigerea: (tho border of the wearing garment ) SeuI:
(2) pleasing with its ebining red tints ( sig) like thore of
thessflower. srqcaatas—goos only with et. arawerce—

com. ‘Tha Queen, touching the Afoka tree with her hand
in tho act of worshipping the imago of Ktma, appeared like «
‘exveper growing on a troo having tender foliage. ‘The safron-
marks mado on the troo aro the éla-pravélas.

This #), in quoted in the KAv.-P, X. as an instance of
the fault of an Updma, called sasnugp ( difference ) of pereons,
For here the common verb famarw must be changed to femray
to make it agroo with gar. frsrsit is, therefore, suggorted as
better reading, a8 ib can agreo with gay and aleo with weft
(understood ), referring to firar in the Vocative o

1, 21. In this dL. the advantage to tho treo from tho
toush of the hand is poctioally described, afyarace—Touched
by the Quoen’s delicate hand tho Adoka appeared to have put
forth a shoot, more delicate and lovelier than those it
already had. For the comparison of the hand to a sprout
of Poa’: watite wfrfr: Bagh. IX. 85, and of the arm ofa
woman to the twig of a troo, ataafremgarton arg Sék. I. 19.

$1, 92, saya &o.—Tho reference is to Kama’s in.
cineration by Siva, See note on dant smceraa aed, additional
Bened. 41, p. 2. sraget—Although tho image had an aga,
the deity represented by it bad not, and could not experience
the plessure of the touch.

‘suear{—The act of showing respect or rendering honour
tos fr. gay respects arrgerargeet: weet | oTeT: LATE AT RLSTE:
‘This was not only in the Siness of things, but necessary.
“Per tho Bhav.=P. dirests—Having off-red adoration to
mind-born divinity, let the wite worship her husband with

dain


--- Page 257 (OCR) ---
Act Ie) 33

omaments, flowers snd raiment, thinking internally with
entire complacency —This is the god of love.’ ” Wilson.

P. 25, aftwe—Zit. thrown up and so drawn away
trom the proper point of attention; hence, completely occupied
by, overpowered by. fyeq—Tho expanto or cluster of the
shoots of a tree ( or creeper ) growing from the main stock
cemrarged ails area wea Reet wa ef, Paedr a feral eaPrATRT
Feenreaait ert HAA. are geuer: e,—wel expresses surprises
By the time Bigariké come back, Madana’s worship was over
nd the King was being worshipped. She eaw the King who
was oxtremely handsomo, and she mistook him for the God of

ing the God of love worthipped
in person, sysitgeeia:—The sight of a deity is supposed to
bring ite roward; it cannot go in vain; and 60 Bigs. withes
that sbe should aleo bo favoured by the deity. gz ug ge—Sho
hud waited thero to sos how Kime was worshipped—whether
he was worshipped in the samo manner as at her father’s
house or otherwise. This being done, she now thinks of
going away. araq aiff &e.—Sho feared because she was told
by the Queen to go sway at once, and not because the saw the
King by not obeying the Quoon; for tho bad no knowledge
then that it was the King that was goen by her,

P., 20. fabats—Soo supra, note on eeftatiet p. 17.
Sarfrm—Lit, ono who sings in different sdlag; a kind of
bard or panegyrist whore duty it was to announce the
fixed periods of the day ( soo Vik. If. 1), by singing asong
(or two ) desotibing in eulogistic terms the king's grandeur,
hig valour &e, Sometimes two bards are mentioned,

1. 23,
the king received the tributary prinoos in the morning and
evening. daqe—congregating from all sides.
hhas a doublo sonso, as applying to urgra (1) the
used to indieate rerpect ) and (2) rays:—(1) having the
lustre ( beauty ) of lotuses; (2) depriving the day-lotuees of
their beauty, &, 3g them to fade, steqemte—(1) may
aleo mean joy and prosperity. seaaeq—may also be taken
an adj. qualifying ay ( rising ever more in prosperity ).

P, 27, aera &o.—Sagarike is ly turprived to
leara from the song of tho bard that her Kusuméyudha is no
other than King Udayans himself to whom ebe was bettothed
by hor fathor. aeqr@ &o.—The samo ooours in Priy. TK. jp 16.



--- Page 258 (OCR) ---
4 [ Act 1.

od as thore is no dative in Prakrit, ge4—
Lit, sending on en errands honos, sorvice, evaqrftara:—the
possing away or advance of the evening twilight, dusk, Tt
ay alto mean ‘the passing away of tho time for the per-
formance of the evouing rites.’ The first only is probably
intended. eqae—v. !. qftefeat: moans ‘brought into the
mind, thought of?

§1, 24, equate. 1. gates ‘hidden by the cortain
oft? But the comparison of a mountain to curtain is strange,

gaiq—Tho part of tho eastern sky palely lit up by

‘the beams of the moon about to rise is called the face of the
eartern quarter. Cf. Kalidten gut ® eneatie ge Vik.
TIL, 6. -geaferd—For the paloness is brought on by constant
thought about the lover. This 41, is quoted in the Subbishita-
wall, with the reading square for ents, which is botter,

aeqarfatt—aeq: ara: share or portion (of luck ) qeart.
a arfee:—was not possible for me to be seen, i. .,I could not
feo him, qt, though given as a root of the 10th Conj., ix
‘more properly a denom. from a7¢ (the other bank), oF the osu.
of g, and means ‘to carry to the other side, to accomplish
fallys? and then, to bo ablo to do anything, :

'P, 28, 61. 26. facenrfter—Throwing into the back-
ground, eclipsing or surpassing, being spotless (all bright ).
Of. went worenGTd renee Petter | Priy. TL. 10. frraftrendA
Booause her face is the subduer of the moon who conquers
10 fade ) the day-lotuses. Pregraat—arar le w1(n oF
veers tho state of being Instreloss or darkened,
rreqfq—Becauee disgrace at the hands of equals is more
anbearable and causes greater humiliation,

ereafcerce—aft8t avi gi; aloo afieress ‘Tetinue, sult’
‘The courtesans had sccompe the Queen that day as it was
a festival day, syyrqpar:-—The female boos aro mentioned, as the
‘shave a more melodious voies than the males. #hrt
gye—The lotuses cloted up at the approach of night and
‘assumed the state of buds again and tho b wero onvased
therein. This the poet describes as a voluntary act on the part
of the bees owing to their being put to shame by the sweeter
songs of the Queen’s attendant courtesans, The fant of the boos
boing shut up in closing lotuses is often referred to by poots.
Of. att wreath gratgrerared Sik. VI. 205 agers weftemmnt
gq Ragh, V. 08; 4 ge awawirvaaey Bhatti. 11. 19,

‘The Gen. qeq it

#

|
|
|


--- Page 259 (OCR) ---
acT iL

In this Act the love of Ségariké for the King, which hes
already germinated and struck root in her heart in the Makha-
eamabi, is desoribed as growing in intensity; and thie is in
socordance with the canon g¢ cor start GaTeaseTaeateEe:

P. 20, sqns—fearaerey sym: ‘ons whose point (keenness)
in gone} hence, oveupled or buay with; eqaite aavt et tail gett
‘wear. We know from tho first Act that Sagarika bad
entrusted the cage of the Siriké to the care of Susamgetdj
hence the entranco of tho latter here with tho cage. mH ge
deo — Cf. eafce ar ga: geraTAT FR aafttar 1 supra p. 22,

sraezage:—This rofers to the King’s trying to make tho
Navamélik blossom out of its season. ‘The maid attributes
it to the influence of some deity, gareq:—This rotors. to the
way in which the King was to accomplish his object.

sravir—Tho root stavic is not exprossly mentioned in the
10th Con. but iv aooeptad there as a denom, from se; if rasta,
bbo regarded as a root by itsolf, then the form will be stair.
sitatara—Sri-Parvata, also called afidter, is a holy place, till
visited by pilgrias, noar tho Krishyé river, inthe Karnal
District, about 120 miles from Hyderabad, ‘The tomple of
Mallinarjana (one of the twolve Jyotirlifigas ) is on a tmall
hill in its neighbourhood, and tho two wore probably desiguat
ed, according to Dr, Sir Bhandarkar, by the name Srigails. It
{is roprotented as tho placo for the attainment of mirsoulous
powers, and a8 such is also referred to in tho MAl.-Madh, I.
(aco p. 18). erftaren—ard ete sft a ar fe. w+ ee we).
Gee—DE TIT that which brings about tho desired objest.
Properly, the bankering or desire folt by a prognant woman,
tho satisfaction of which ensures good progeny; hence, such
« craving felt by plants; and henoo, again, any proparation oF
medical recipe which onables plants to put forth flowers or
‘rujts even out of thelr season.

P. 30. qféet—a brash for drawing pictures. wage a
‘casket; hero a small box containing painting materials,
qa—This like frupeorg is an interlude meant to acqasint the
udlenoo with those ovents, not represented on tho atage, whioh,
Lave already ocetrod or aro to ooear in the near future. Bat
there is this difference between the two—The ss is carried
on by low charactets only, speaking Prakrit ( andts thhtotora



--- Page 260 (OCR) ---
36 [ Act 11.

not distinguished into fia and aye); it comes between any
two Acts (and thus it cannot como at the beginning of tho
first Act, x the (emo does); and in it more than two
characters oan also take part,

sfateq—‘tastoning after, clinging to; hence, pi
ay of. pee gaat arama vt werent gfeead GEIR Pri
goa: (rreatereas gga May Malay. IT. 4,

P, 81, qus—Tho oruelty los in fore
was a friend from birth, ftaet meee &e.—For there is no
chivalry in striking a woman, and especially in the cate of
one #0 woll known for his bravery. Soin Nag. II. waeq
FORTGY... at GaTATTATRCIRSTY Se NTR TAT. wT
arsagifis—and therefore without a heart; and to you oxnnot
feel pity for me and are not therefore to blame, eifet &0.—
80 her ill luck is wholly to blame for bringing about tho
circumstances leading to her death. Cf. far aed sifwer
war & pzeee Pdf Priy. TH p. 20,

q(aaaa—Ill omen, vis, her heart porsistently fooling
love for the King; or, this may refer to Kma's shooting hie
arrows at her. srqad Het ©. l—orged is unnecessary alter
aia erresi--sqenr is supporting or steadying the hoart;
hence wie, ‘with firmnere.’ qaraat—apleqenat JeqT:
fooussing, concentrating her mind on one object. qureritfet—
Sho moans that she would then put anend to her life,
spqgea:—is usually dissolved asa Karm, Now ina Karm.
auch as Grew, there is grarufeRTes, 6. ge and its
after avo identical, Butin the present case aim and qea aro not
indentical. But, secording to Vamana, they may be regarded
ts such metaphorically, through the relation of sree (« part)
and staf (the whole of which it is apart ), See com.

P, 92. efet fe tr. kr to prompt, to go &
ee Gferewaier aera Tar ; aoxording to one’s motion or pleasure;
hones, gently, stealthily, walking, sre qr—This modifies her
previous ejaculation, There is nothing to praise you for. It is
but uatural that. a eaerat &o.—trage, the royal swan
or flamingo, is described as a white bird of the goose tribe
with red loge and a red bill. . Cf. erat asiften @3 aT ngraae-
ari weal egeroratonitng erent caitat wet | Sak. ILL p. 725
sa Mitunged mgwrarseiot | Ragh. VI, 85. rarafgen—ste.toh-
ing upward, i+, raising up. e@rrqrd}—Notioe the pres, pett.s

ing one who



--- Page 261 (OCR) ---
|
|
|
r

Act II. ] EY

sho wat concealing it, had no time to coneeal it, and so
i was seon by Suenmgaté. a qq:—Although Sue, knew who
was drawa, sho purposely asks. the question to elicit the
truth from ber friend,

P. 38. qi@i—Tho smiln indicator that she knows the
truth fagard—msy have a double sense:—( 1 ) Your ekill in
drawing; (2) Your clevernese in biding the truth, yez—
void of interest, defvotive ( being vnacoompanied by raat of
Rati ). qari—ara ‘ master}? garg ‘one having master to
look atter;? of. warar sara wiferiem: 1 Sk. 15 hence, ‘seeom-
paived dy, joined to? in which senso ir is commonly used,
ayatire—encigead ava by which one ie led away; fe. feet with
(and sq and ufix a2 ( st); hence, a pretext,

‘areqaar=With an air of censure or chiding dtaspprovingly.
saga a Rear gHeafT | Amare, sHmUTnfe—may mean
(1) You who pess or represent things otherwise; or (2) you
who misroad things, or think otherwise of mo; ef. sratemt-
‘weray aaeq Shik. I, Sho means to ssy—You think otherwise of
mo, i, xogard me at having no interest in you.’ This is prefer-
able, as appears from tho reading waite}, ‘thinking improperly
of? ai@ast—Pot. p. p. used imporsonelly, meaning ‘what
must or ought to be,’ Of. further on, pp 41, 67 &.

P. 34, ga:—But again’ ( used WE). Rurfett—teo
com, Rar is that faculty of the mind by which one grasps ideas
and retains them, retentive memory; Haifeft ‘having strong
momory,’ talented. Hore it is the name of the Sérikt due to bor
having & strong memory, ax is olear from Sussmesté’s speech
ab p. 47 (frarftear Burfterg ).  seraraer qMiererer—ie asomp.
‘areas armenia, being equal to gyararargtr. aytamat o. b is
not noticed in the foot-notes, It means shaving saught the
contents (+. the words) of’. But here sig has to. be taken
in & restricted onto, aysteeut areai®—Dte reading imi
rae should rather have been adopted, as sho was already
wemqrtaear. efdewr—is « largo oblong well'or artificial pond
contataing lotus-plante. gorftrer—-the same’ ay qu}, fom.
fr, gore (a tender :lotus-shoot): which is more common,
Tovwe-leaves. and stalks are. montioned as being usually
resorted to for allaying the fever of lov

P. 35, G1. gia &o.—Thoso three aro sdduced as
‘the rongons for het Jove being fam (uneven, that-cannot tei
‘smooth course)—which is sare to lond to trouble:andnisaay.

Rex 4



--- Page 262 (OCR) ---
88 [Act 11.

geraare—In the first place, her love is for a person dificult
to obtain, being far out of her reach. As geuwa is hore
emphatic, Prof. Bay proposes to rondor the Prakrit as giuora
sigera: (being equal to gga srguim: ) which is cortainly
better. memrqyi—And to add to her difficulty, her sonse of
shame is very great, co that she eannot directly or indireetly
make the disolosure to the King. And to make matters worse,
the was not her own master and so had no independence of
fotion (being entirely in the power of the Quocn), The
only courte, therefore, lett to her, she thinks, is to Gnd solace
indoath. faaafer &o.—This in elliptioal for freufet aqr
im qh Resi war eo. weet ko—msy be taken asa question:

e.com,; oF A¥t may be taken asa comp. of q ( xot az )
with ag, ‘that than whioh none is bettor, the bost.” Some take
arat in the sense of Sad; ‘wae Fat’ A arEaTeTe arefa
Haus merme—V. 1. Tho addition of gwee which means
‘x mixed noise? is unnocessary, as the ilokas that follow
show thet there was no such gage. The breaking loose of
the monkey and the confusion caused by that are described
by some ono behind the curtains.

SL. 2 ais gure—When the monkey broke off his
chain, part of it that was attached to his neck remaixed
hanging down, and this he dragged along a» ho ran about.
Ta—n. fa rope for fastening; hence, here, a chain. @at—
sport; hence, wanton movement, qarar~e—a belt, « circle.
Taregtyprre—may altobe takon at a gragees? aNeRTERIE,
being equivalent to qurgaag: like arrnvea wetars eupra,
D.-R, roads o@t qarat-.mega:. spqUa:-the stable-keepers
wer:—ata by bounding motion read ew: by afixing st
(qq) to 14 before which a nasal is added to the fret momber
by adding © (of) wo get gem: also, It was customary to keip
‘a monkey, especially a male one, in the horte-stable, asa
sfoguard against evil-eye-inflaenes and against evil epirits, Cf.
tho Persian proverb, as quoted by Wilson—‘‘Tho misforvun
of the stable be on the monkey's hond? ( Bilai Tahila ba ser”
i maimum ). wezt1—a stable for horses,

61, 8. edi—Banuchs. & eect: waar ivrey et
ene: | rear a gers rig RH tT: EAT Uh

P, 36, qdeare—aftme: sien: gen: ‘the border all round;?
how see com. ata: REY—Cf. the derivation of ura, fet
créer ora fone constantly moving about, é¢, ving aay

f

;



--- Page 263 (OCR) ---
|
|

anime

‘Act IL. ] 39

the borders of hille or mountai
mountaineers, liko the Bhils, and clasted as Mlechohhas by
A’ryan writers, ‘They were foroed into service and employed
as watchmen by kings, ‘This is also translated as ‘tho
monntainee of the bounds, acted in a style
accordant with their name, i.e. they did valiantly, not ruuning
ewsy from the monkey.’ P. Mitra’s trans, of S.-D., p. 63,
at the gonoral drift of the fl.
tooping still low; and henes grafts as they had
shortened their forms they could not walk quickly. Accord-
ing to Prof. Ray aiwat bas « double sonvo—wkar and orazte
at (i. they walk like mean, poor-spirited peraons ). Servants
such as those mentioned in this Sl. were employed as assistents
in barems, Of, serge ater: feu aeTIMAT | aT
arprTTT: eeewrUT fe: wt DAR, IT. 44, 45,
anraPrcite—They thought of the Taméla grove, as the
tamélas being of a dark coloar could afford thom better
shelter. The Taméla grows on the slopes of tho Malabar bills.
Tthas thick leaves of a dark-green colour, which aro used
spices.

‘@fr2—0 you who are guite at eate;? heneo, one who does
not take thought of the future, thoughtless. farwani
Farwe—Sho moans, the pioture-board is not a mattor of groat
‘concern; it is tho SérikA that must be first attended to, ae she
has ecoaped from her eage now. gfipray—an Inetr, Tat

P, 87, qéeayt ra &e.—The Vide, is dosoribod as monkey-
like im sppearance; of qq eg anfwieemarat ¥4---sirdaran
eet Vik. IL p. 28; s& wftenge Go. Nig. IIL p, 64.

aue:—azvirger ©. 2. ‘with a toms of thecurtain,? ‘This
stage-direotion (like sivéitm ) is used when s character
enters euddenly, either owing to haste or under the info
ence of some emotion, tuch as fear, joy or sorrow, and without
the usual introduction aq: m/ta@. ‘This is out of place here es
tho entrance of Vidi. is previously intimated. For agg tee

20,” frceme—s0 a8 to leave no space between, witeearin—
is stort for feet 4s, 4. cay fem ware,

P, 88. qetera—aiter may bo explained es aie: gu
(beyond the senses) qx boing changed to ai when arg follows; oF
a1 sem: Ge efiat Avya., by the rule aixarenerdisem, and then
‘Adding of nerd; in elther case the comp. is irregular, Ezglain
pimilarly gergt. qantatde:—wer Pie: ways, a comp, seg

‘Name of s wud tribe o



--- Page 264 (OCR) ---
40 [ Act 11.

51. 4, sqritte—Tho adjectives apply to the oreoper, Nava,,
anda woman in love, Thus ugnis means:—(1) baving «
Tnxorisnt ( ggrm) growth of buds ( sfie@t ); (2) whote loves
longing is excersive feqrogred—(1) having a brilliant
‘appearance (being covered with blosrome); (2) with n very pale
complexion (owing to pining ). arrsaett—aear tho open
ing of buds; yawning szrar#—(1) its being tossed; (2) pain
oxperioneed Ly her. rqqvirg’:—(1) the uphoavole of the
wind: (2) the heavines of sighs, qagat—(1) with the
‘Maduns tree; (2) fall of passion oF love,

This I. i quoted fa the D.-R, as en instance of cmeweare by
apaftvwont (4. ¢, having paronomustic adjectives }, which is defined
a0 reese GHENT | careTeUIe Grae «That
‘whieh, by the mention of something foroigu to the matter ia band,
indicates the present bosiness going forward, or some futare inci-
dont, either by « similarity of situation or the use of parcnomastic
attributes, is ealied Pattkfathhna.” See D.-R. p. 6

ayFATT—The nows about the blossoming of Ni

P. 89. SI. 5, ‘The gennineness of this $1
Itt omitted in some editions.

rami
is quostionable-

fen wits We afar: gediew: Bg. XV.
11, 18, af—The celebrated gom called wequ, obtained at the

gburing of the oovan. The referonco to the fight of the
oneiniet at ‘the sight of the gem ie not clear ear:—strack
down, &.0, overpowered by. neqaerg—C/. amrtamrarg seat aT
aa: gpermaragnhganen: | Kir. 1 24,

sraserdtce—tir properly ought to go with aamm but then
the comp. will be @rergaor; gezartte may bo defended on the
principle of aigernpor: of Sz w Fast cisonfanie:| Nai. VIE 86,
Bat if thie cannct be allowed, att must be taken with eratwzr:.
iqarg—He was tho bravest and most distinguished of the
sous of Ravens, By his power of heovming invisible, which
he bad obtained from Siva he captured Indra and bore. him
off to Laitké Bras with the other gods burried thither
and procured his releate, giving the victor the title of Indrsjtt
In the grest war ho seriously wounded rot only the cbief
monkey-warriors, Sogriva, Atigada, Nala, Bushega and
others, but Rima and Lakshmaps also, and went away leaving
them unconscious’ on the battlo-feld, They wore, however,
prought back to consofbusnoss and had their wounds healéa vy,



--- Page 265 (OCR) ---
Act II. ] a

{inhaling tho smell of the healing herbs brought by Hanémén
from the Kéilésa, grétay—zrdig pride, self-importance, ‘The
‘Vidé, feels proud as his party bas won, the Kirg’s favourite
creeper Navemsliké having flowered before Madhav! the
Queen's favourite one.

P. 40° Grg-—may mein “existence? oF ‘possitility.”
Rarti—v, 1. power j ‘how can such prevail hore?”

Sl. 6. eqzrer’—A starling sponks more clearly than a
Parrot. srfaigif@—Not resounding or spreading out 80 a8 to
bo hoard at a distance ; and henee it cannot be human voice,

(Additional readings ) srargar: d by nature? but
the affix sirg added to sf is is against Pépini; the allowed
te ive or Hg:

Frg7—wicked ; hero Vid@., as suits his charactor, wittily
compares his stick, which was crooked, toa wicked man’s
heart. mfFeawe—a wood-apple (wer in Marsthi ). Of.
weerge yeareea fhe Awl anahe gorerda uele Tae
memqenrargrgan wraeean { Mrich, V. p. 117.

P. 41. gar amit &e—From here the Shriké ie repre:
sented as roproducing, verbatim, the conversation betwoen
garikl snd Susamgaté. This habit of these birds is often
referred to by Sanskrit poots ; of: sigai@ = ftt meeneaihangrer-
aqegit geet asqererared: | Ragh. V. 74; queda seat
degbretid aaa: mae Gaeameaieand ee &e
Amaruis, 16, Itis dificult, however, to imagine how the
bird conld do it with euch precisoness. But that is not the
post's concern. He wants to acquaint the King with SégatikA’s
love for him, whioh is necessary for the future development
of tho plot, and uses this device,

warn &c,--Under tho protext of; i.¢. she passed the
picture off as Kémadeva’s, aq—Soo com. eifear—The

sharp sound produced by the snapping of the thumb axd the
middle finger,

P. 42, wit}—It so, i. 0. if she

W-=800 com; gt is an imitation of an’ indistinet
sound j tho aflix arg (sit) is added to such « ward, before
‘which if is doubled, whan it consists offxt least two syllables
(Cand when it is not followed by gfe). Tb then takes the affix
wagand we get Grouae-k. caet—Explain eqeenn Rar:
Matar satan evened waged: Ta boing added mrad. gems
‘afeg—The Vidi. miatokes the géché aung by the GAriké dos
1 vette of the Rig-Vada, svete

aeiar as you say.



--- Page 266 (OCR) ---
(2 [Act 11.

B. 43. aerarqr—This is ironical. The word wea, when
prefixed to cortain words (see oom, ) expresses reproach
‘wtqalarr—Lit, one whose youth is praiseworthy, hence,
endowed with all the charms of youth. sftfaatatterar—by
ono grown rogardless of life. gme—Crocked, round-about
spooohes. mrmarato—The Vidi. has always « high regard
for his master; to him none is more handsome or accomplished
than ho, and henco ho thinks that the picture drawn by the
maiden most have beon the King’s, as, in his opinion, none
‘could be pated off as the God of Love. Cf. in this respect—
Wemr——araee sea TANG Ba ea CEM BERT LTO
ag waramdh % Ga 1 Sak. IL. p. 51.

SI. 8, gelcl—irresistible, that osmmot be got rid of.
rPickt—one affected by love, love-stricke

P. 44. firuawe—fargs ( young children ) alsounknow-
ingly repeat what they hear. Some road gwfPye; bat there
is no propriety in saying ‘repeated by young parrots,” as
grown-up parrots aro equally ignorant of the senso of what
‘they repoat, qrqrat——That is, those that hear {t are bletsed,
fas thea they oan sek out sush girls and try to sroure them,
saaqare—'Becomes the guest of 4. e, is casually heard by.

arar erearsgat | ore arag &e.—The Biriké is no more
‘useful for the furtherance of tho plot, ‘Tho post's purpore
‘was to take the King and his friond to the plentsin-bower
‘whére the pictare-board was left. ‘The Sérikwe flight to
‘tho bower was the device used to sorve this purpose, ‘The
‘Vid®. therefore says—Never mind the Striki; let us sit
hhoro, &o, atqa—dattering, shaken up; qualifies the word gz.
wrvwget &o.—Tho stone-tiab wat fenced round by yourg
plantain-treoe in order that it ebould be kept cool.

sqariene—Some rosd saresriee ( partially opened ) gitar
‘Tho wlole passage is also read ar—af) euea waa aqeieaaico,
gears seat: aifte gare wee | arar—eaeY FaRCEAT | aEe=—
ameAT Mare | ( aReswearrerTT y ) AUG... waIle | ( TEieaT ke, )
ar rae &o,

P, 45, apftitfae—Lit. that which is meant to give
satiotaction (ofan +e6 ) 8 reward.

&1, 9, Horo also tho attributes are paronomastic. ‘The
maiden is compared to s femsle swan. efareyaear—
2) who surpastes, Lakstm! by her grace; (2) who has shaken
OF agitated the lotasor by ber sport. sumed &o—Indioating



--- Page 267 (OCR) ---
‘Act IL] 43

special leaning towards (love for) us (: Gen. ); (2) displaying
to wt ( a: Dat. ) the groat movement ( fepping ) of her wings.
arae—(1) the hearts (2) the Inke of that nome, faqant—
(2) deacated in the pictures (2) with a grail (Fes) get
or varied motion,

51.10. Frare &o.—a1q@ extraordinary, becaute always
full and always present. eg:feua:—In the presence of this
moon, the lotus that formed bis eeat closed op and contequently
Brabmé conld not sit comfortably on it (being pressed trom
all sides by the closing petals), For Saree see com. Acvording
to come there is slso the fig. aifrmanit in this, This al. ts
quoted in the Subbdshitdvalf as of Srf-Harehadeva,

P. 46. qoq—acluster or clump of. faiviay—Bycing
slosely, gaaing intently, gofaq—s. 2. Doseribing.’ Bus fatto
in better, as the King had his eyes fixed on the picture when
Sus, saw him. Th ge-direotion “rama wrerfiea!’ also shows
that the King was lost in his admiration of the pioture,
But if wo read aayeerea in Sus.’s previous speech and the
following stage-direction as gi srwufqa:, then the reading
aaa must be preferred,

sravagelt—We should have preforred the reading @fqa~
oft; for when Sasamgath saw hor friend, tears wore trickling
down from her eyes ( as thown by the stage-dircotion gia oF
tre p. 31), and so tbo was painted, at is clear from the
King’s words orrerereaforst a9 in fl. 11,

wi sot af wUtiR-Tit rotors to the King and not to be
as tome take it, She means—In your fondness for jokes, you
are lowering the King by reprotenting bim as loving me, who
am only a servant of the Queen,

B, AT, qeyaft—brings delight to; genom. from gn.
Crt araft) oF adj. ( wernenrefifa ad by adding the po
ive sft, st) ge wit. sfiftamreraiceat—she was sure of
death; of supra geet grat dl, 1; bat now, a ber pictore was
already before the King, her life bungon his reply; if he would
tay “Yos,! sho had reason to live; in osee he, would eay ‘No,’
doth was oortain, ‘Thus she stood on the beundary-line
between life. and death. So says the similarly placed
Dashyante—srarat avmprarat naifea Stk. 11 9.

41. 11, weyrq—Whon the eyes wore onst on hor thighs,
‘they could not Jeave them casily ( owing to the besaty of the
Infter). oy®—eqe here implies excellence, which consists Sn

sl,



--- Page 268 (OCR) ---
44 [ Act It.

Shoexpanse of the ftaex (nuei Paes: Fraexeusa). Freet—faatt
wea: fireeas; the comp. is allowed as it is a qzi. If it be not
rogurded at a tig then the comp, will havo to be taken as one
of tho aremiftranry clase: Rftrer at Finch. ‘The fauatt (threo
folds of skin near the waist) forms an almost invariable pert
of tho description of a beautiful woman by Sanskrit poets;
of waa a ARMRUT afeRd IE TMI watt Kum. 1, 39;
Srerirensiazar fend, DAK; gata mig waifeaieg!
Kir. VIL 24. oftga—rnggod, dificolt to be croued,
Honso freqrgarar> ‘motionless through exhaustion owing to
the dificulty of crossing.’ qi@tg—‘as if thirsty’ (as one
would be after ascending mountain ), are —The sight
Was eagerly looking at the eyes as they were shedding tho
water of tours, A thirsty person also. eagerly looks at the
touree of water, q®—looks at (nnd doot not leave them,
‘8s it did the other parts ).

wie ge exar—The King’s reply was as Ségarikd had
wished it, So Susamgaté arks hor this question. But modesty
oes not allow her to say “Yee”. Again, it was the piotare that
the King admired, there was nothing in the sl. to show
that the King loved her. So sho asks hor friend to hear the
King who was praising rather tho skill of the painter than
hor own olf. Pragrd—special «kill.

P. 48. aeq Greif &e.-Tho Vida, means—Whon maidens
whom you admire admire you, you ought to think highly of
ourtelf, bat you do not do it, your attention being solely
absorbed by the beauties of maidens, ‘Terre:—means hero
slight, disregard. agarn—Tbe King meaue~I do not think
lightly of mysolf ( qeray), but Lrogard, it at a great: honour
doae to me thst she has painted me,”

SL. 12, greqiey &¢.—It should be remembered that tears
wore falling from Sagarixt’s eyes while she wat engaged
in drawing the King’s picture, Some of there drops fell on
the ploture itself. and those are referred to hore by the King.

ovtesce—aiiet ‘drops,’ a ‘small pattioler’ (into which the

drops were broken as they foll on the hard board). ‘The
‘appearance of perspiration is ove of the oight grfeage res due
to the sensation produced by ardent love. It thus indicates
the King’s love.

aateeatft @ o.—Tho King’s words srararssftefewitetiae &a,
and the indication of love for hor All Séga, with groat joy,


--- Page 269 (OCR) ---
‘Act II. ] 45

It was more thin what she had expected from the King.
She had regarded him ax a qfsrate. Her most fervent expecta~
tion was that he might treat her with some cousideration—~
perhaps respond to her love out of pity. Henco she says
naive & &e.

aftemtt—Grostly or entirely (aft) faded,
great heat. efa—-p. p. of carg, 1 A’, to grow or
swell. fa is tho form when it refers toa limb of tho body
(Eiri); otherwise cara or dia. @fRitern—‘closo contact with}?
the proper form is afta. So this is « postio licence, Such
forms when used by great writers are justified by the maxim
starqgat ffiefae:. To avoid tho grammatical anomaly some
propose the reading afefafeans.

P 49. sarq—placing or arrangement of. s4y—languid,
Arooping, owing to the torment, str2rq—throwing out, exadin
sparaft—thin-bodied ( naturally, and not due to omaciation).

Sl. 14, aemireut—aene is derived as wad a conscious
nous; waft q(@ a: tho destroyor of (te. ma-+ag yma A
wag. mreatfiat—V. 1. aeqaes got, caused by, Madana.’
ogftorrg—extent, large expanse; so in. Shk,—eraguaftorgrser-
feat apa Bl. read before SI. 18; p. 20. rerftareat—Tho
reading rants is not good, as varia rofers more to the mental
than to the physical condition,

ixenito—fiprana auflering from, boing withered. ‘The
heat was great owing to the fiqre of the brossts, seraeamatife—

V1. pining because dropped from. Bat wo cannot expect
uch on obsorvation from tho Vids it will exit tn tho mouth
of a gallant only.

syeng2—aat dull, inoepable of discrimination arf: aes.
Also staf ( gegetvirgieg) mart: source ea, sprung from water.

P, 60 SI 15. Firiraare—With the instinct of « tran
gallant the King thinks that the garland was, witbaring
( ploing ) for being displaced from Sigua bronetes and alle
is foolish ¢ aeze ) for doing to. The reseon, is, stated in
thonext two liver  aerneaiefr ko Cf. fora similar descrip.
tion, mnt amy eatngwer weg otmaKrMrTCETeR | Kum, I,
46. ‘Phiy dl, iv also fonad in the Sabbésbix8valf, as Hareha’s
mntly, inappropriately. For’ inthe”
‘Pibseding verse ho addressed the inanimate garland ss 4
wentiont being. wee wat &e—The sentonso, j¥ 9



--- Page 270 (OCR) ---
4s [ Act II,

worded that Régar, should understand hy it the King, and when
sho saspoots that and aske a question, Susamgats passes off the
matter by saying ‘I mean the piotnrebosrd, though you euspect
something clts (i.e, the King), For a parallel ¢f.—aga-
atowi— ee oRaTIT Te: Ge AAT THEI ( REET )
fe aah) eEEM—a areal | Uiisiiemasst cows: |
Milur, IIL p. 55, This Mostrates one of tha aflgas of
Pratimakbsssmabi, onlled ait (afcgraee: ),

P. 51 eirex—Ségariké is angry thet her friead should
thas miske fan of hor and says that she would go away, not
Doing able to understand her exigmatical apeoches,

saem—One who cannot brook delay or bear a joke.
aie egt aeiet—Vide. was in a hurry to warn the King,
au ho did not know that Susamgatd, though the Quoen’s maid-
servant, was interested in SAgariké’s well-being.

faqra:—tally known. This speech of Susomgats is quoted
{in the 8.-D. as an instance of ray oF a speech in harsh words
which comes as a thunderbolt (gives a shock), It is
quoted in the D.-R. as an instance of srzaf oF a jost meant to
frighten, Hero Sus, protends to bea partisan of the Queen
and sooks to frighton tho King as a matter of joke,

sryard-This stage-direction is ured when a charactor snye
something to another by tarning towards him or her, prevent-
ing others from hearing it by seroening thom with the palm
‘of the hand with three fingors raised, #0 8 to look like three
banners; ageeuarien | Teel g ETAT TT Ta | Rea
Rovaaensiearene t 8.-D. ger—Kiree ge (eet)
renr:, fr. ge+T a possessive (qq )aflix. Itmeans ‘garralous,’
speaking disagreeably. epferdt—Zit, one who is a slave trom
conception; a born slavo; used as a tarm of contempt,

P. 52, oxarer—The Instr. is Bat 5‘ by reason of, on the
strongth of, my lord’s favour.’ qq gq % &e.—Here we have
‘srvarm ( one of the aity's of nfagurifir) which consists in the
‘use of conciliatory words meant to remove the unplessant-
nots caused by a joke.

gan ar 4freafs—The Vidd means that in case Ségar.
should, by some chanoo, slip from the hands of the King, the
board might be a source of comfort to him. But we shall dnd
farther on, that like other dovices of the Vid, this also proves
to bo # source of embsrrasemont to him,

{


--- Page 271 (OCR) ---
Act IL. J a

P, 68, sareqeaft—This is ee, one of the eight Séitvida
Brie

1, 16. xq:—The plural is used, as BrahmA has eight
eyes, qyattpar—extended wider (in order to have a fall
viow of). farafarre—This opithet has no epesial ropricty.
PrarPe—za, (wear) ‘to shake,’ does not lengthon its a

in the causal; of. fgft witel seafaigi®: 1 Kir. XIV, 50;
seargrswertiewrt | Ragh. VIII, §3. ogares—aeri-t at
ant waiFaqr a cowp. of tho Gog class, (Some take this as
a'Tat ), Orit wy be taken io tho sense of ga ‘ike’, dissolve
warta gear werment, o Nitye-camies, So in the Sik. ar
araranenragat spat &e. Act Il. p. 51; aerman: oda
‘Act IIL p. 72, The motre of thle s/. is faulty since the pause
which ought to be at tho Sth ayll. is misplaced in the 2ud and
4th Lines, not being at the ond of a pada. Wilson quotes—

Ventidivs to Antony.

‘Were auce the chief, and best of human race.

0 perfect that the gods who formed you wondered

‘At their own skill, and cried, a lucky hit,

Has mended our deaiga.”—AUl for Love

‘arget—Sus, had gone oxpressly for bringing the piotur
osrd, while she brought the King ; bones the reproach. Of
course the siqar was only outward.

81,17, snfifa—From wim anger-+¢e{ (pore. affix show-
ing excess); or srart wre fr. wig 1 A’. to be angry (with ga
{Rifa:), draseible, passionate,’ The King was told that Sige, was
angry with hor friend, and ho still found her in that mood.
Henco ho addrotsos hor as 91if/@. qa—may refer to git
or to Sasamgaté (‘although you look angrily at her she loves
you and will not resent it’). «@¥ ayfteur@—will cause trouble
(exhaustion) to you. Of, mreceqeat frareaa: | Nag. 11. 6.
ae iment V. 1_wil feel oppressed.

B, 54, SL. 18, qrfrecareat: &o.—She thus combines in ber
self the proportios of both j hore i hor omgkes.  qiftmrs—The
tree produced at the charming of the oaean. As it was produced
‘long with neotar, it is spoken of be shedding nectar.
Serwqut—The appearanoe of perspiration produced by the
touch of her lover is one of tho Sattvika Bhévae, C7. Vateykyana
arm g raERIMe eure: feoweet v HMTe | Mo, Cf aT

Rerateraterrgt erat eewRa | Priy. UL, 11,



--- Page 272 (OCR) ---
4s [ Aot 11.

safafinger—sreftgat ©. 1 not polite, ungenerous. gem:
arare—ge sicrgaed Gv. 1 which ie equivalent to ge
Srorgarres eH, the qm in ge boing added wy.

P, 55. ear Rg &o.—Tho words here are so arranged as
to have two difforent meanings, Whilo tho Vid, meant to
7—'This is another (second ) Queen Vise. (on sccount of
her stubbornness of angor ),’ the King and others took him to
Hore comes another, Queen Vasuradatthy’ end heneo
their confusion, sq-In this unexpected situation. aysatfweat=
Kooping betwoon a8 a soreen; hence, hidden by.

SL, 19, In this 4. Big. and qareat ( nocklaoe of
gems) are compared. ‘The various epithets spply to both
wrsndtict—(1) not embraced ; (2) not taken to (plscod round)
the nook. wepztrar—(1) whore atiachment was manifo
2) whose lustre or radiance is clear (bright ).

P. 68. sre (gafter)—is waif (indicates a question ).
ed Parcafs—This is of courte false. He says 0 in order that
the Queen should not get the least inkling of what happened
between him and Sageriki, gecmiey—&e, This brings
oat the wounded pride of tho Queen. The glow on tho King’s
duo to hie mecting with Ségorikt. But
the Queen mistook it for the glow of triumph over her
‘on account of the flowering of the Navamilikt, Henco her
rofutal to go to seo the oreeper. mma: vafe—The Vide. in
his wild joy dancos with out-strotobed arms, forgetting all
‘bout the piotnre-board, which falls down and only sorves to
exposo tho King’s teoret. Such inadvertence of the Vid8. is
well known and often leads his friend into a situation of
of embarrassment. Of, the dropping down of the bireh-leaf
from the hands of the Vidd,, with a similar result, in Vik. II.
fand of the oraaments Irading to Obfiradatta’s conviction in
the Mich. Some rend after qa: aaf@, ag gat Piet azure.
sequent specoh of the Vide. shows that he does not
orry for it, but is on tho contrary self-confident,
Its, therefore, rejooted.

P.87. eega—Thie agein, é. o. who ought not to be
here. ferear——tt. Req one that has lost the point of attention
or aim ( wea eI wat )s bewilderment, confusion, embarrass.
ment, srewr—one’s own form. afe tga eezai—This
apparently meat+-It aueb a ono wat over secteby us, i. ¢4the
form painted in puro inyobtion. The Vidé. also says the truth



--- Page 273 (OCR) ---
Act IL J 49

for he really means such a one was only seen by them for the
first timo,

P. 58, gorrert—gor is a kind of insct that bores holes into
wood. In the course of ite incisions in the wood it happens
to trace out a figure which resembles a letter of the alpbabet.
Henco gurgt moans ‘any accidental resemblance,’ Kafich,
says that it may be quito by accident that the figure drawn by
the King resembles Sagariké, seqR-Here & is gearet (implies
reproach ), you silly one’. yaeaPmatfx—eqnivooal eposchos,
speeches which have another then the plein meaning.
Herararar:—Ths apparent meaning isMy looking at the
picture with a steaifust gizo has produced hoadaohe,? The
real mesning is—Tho sight of the woman by your side bas
produced headache. *

61.20. yz%—doos not Gt in, is not proper. greafy—
According to the ro ‘srgvmnfog:,” ar when used by iteclt
ought to take the A'tm,, bot the Sitra refers to oases whet
the fleas refers to the agent, as wf ori. Here the know-
ledge that tho statement is false ( gar) doot not benodt the
Queen aud so the Paras. is usod. This al, illustrates wares
(the resonciling of one who is offended ), one of the aigas
of sfaige eit. ‘This is quoted in the Bubbésbithvalf ander the
heading aigiw. syraur—i.«. Iam offended,

P. 69, srarer—Bocsuse she came at an improper time
(sierer: gra), ie af tho time of Sigariki's meeting,
sefPrmreara—Through nobility of birth. Being noble-born
and well-bred, she suppressed her anger; that is all.

41.21. Searft—penetrating the heart, becadse it was @
milo of anger. smqaat—must be token with every line; she
did all that as sho bad perfect self-control, q=e-The two qe
indieate simaltancity of action. yup, heart gfen and card}
4 wy: indionted hor anger; xed Ait at ANT &s.—indicated
her uma or modesty of demeanour, decorum. Cf. with this
Priya, IIT, 18. After il, 21, some read fige-nat Mt ate
rewrite’ do. (200 foot-notee)s ua —ag m afemeeat Rent: ag:
aredut Girard queer areuaserd qf. ‘Thove two specchen
fare evidently an interpolation. ‘There is no swugiga in
what the King-saye, Again, they repoat what is already paid
in the provious specohes of tho Vid. and the King) |

BMS



--- Page 274 (OCR) ---
60 [ Act UL,

aie qare—The roading teers Twure: is better and
should have been proferred. For, a2 the Quoon did not show
hor anger openly, hor ga1g7 was out of ques:ion, as remarked
by the Kiog himself in4l, 20, ‘Tho King now simply wishes
to go to ascertain tho real stato of the Quoen’s mind, Besides,
wwe do not find any attempt at pscifcation on the part of the
King early in the next Act, ‘Tho tra osoasion for that
arises in that Aot, aygefrér ary—Tho Act is named after the
Plantain-bower, that being the main scene of action.

ACT IIL

P, 60, sqrergt—This stage-dirsotion is uted when «
character addresses a epecch ton perton not present on tho
stage, abows that bo hears roplics and repeata them for the
information of the audience, with the words f% waif &.; ree
com. aitarfeat—from hor namo she appears to be a native of
Kaudimbf and in tho rorvice of the King. ail gear—In ord
to hear a supposed reply, asi arrti—is idiomatic for ‘a long
timo has elapsed,” and constantly occurs in literator
iearan—seara from oi to throw with gq ond ay a ta
saronem; seared Gusts Sssrdt argariait (8.-D. afefeare-
Properly, pesco and war, ‘Theto aro the cbiet of the si
expedients to be used by @ king in forcign politics, [The
remnsining four are;—a77 or leading an expedition against an
omy, all things being favourable; sire or blockading, or,
sitting quiot, waiting for a fevonrable opportunity; % oF
duplicity; and srry oF rotortiog to a fort, sooking the help of
powerful king, &o. |. Kalish, homoroutly uses these terms,
with roforonco to tho Vidé., in the senso of his planning (oF
busying himelf witb) a union betweon tho King and Sagarikt,
and bringing sbout thereby a quarrel batweon the King ad
Vésavadatts. cged—rgi wi 9 sooret, fr. RFRA

P61, Prauftrar—fearat mat fererer te Reentewtes
a plotare-ball, It was probably a emall building where painting
was tanght and pictures kept. gxffaeqr—Having omitted,
excopting. tis properly an sbsolutive, bat it bas lost. iis
charactor s8-such and is used like a preposition. O/, geet
faqra &o. usod similarly, gaere—This means of course thet
she should try to bring about Ségariié’s union, with the fing,

it,



--- Page 275 (OCR) ---
‘Act IIT. J 31

srq—gous with af. gareq—an inoldent, affair, garegt-
Gi—The roward was given that Sasamgati should keep good
watch over Ségariks. gay ae wg: warms aPavaTa—Cf. 8
milar plan formed for the union of the King with A‘rapyuk&
in Priy. IIT. It was this—For the amusoment of the
Queen the adventures of Vatsurdja, while a prisoner at
Ujjayint, ois, how VSsavadattd was placed under his tuition
in musie, how ke won her love and managed to steal away
with hor, &e., should be represented on the stages there
Keanyekd was to play the part of Visava, and Manorazt,
hor friend, was to roprosout tho King. It was arranged thet
Manoramf, drgssed as the King, when sbout to appeat on the
stage, shoold contrive to remsin bark, while the King him-
If shoald enter the stayo and act his own part,

P, 62, garr&—o. 1. garst—Ono whos» hopes ought to bo
destroyed on account of one's wickedness; hence, wicked,
cursed, omtasi—nedisear self cem@r affectionate; fr, eH
affeo'ion aud % added waif (in the seuse of posseasion), The
roward given and the confdvace pat ia Susa, bear out the
Queon’s qiraea. gureacrar—This shows bow loving the
Queen was, ‘Tho news of her husband's indieporition not
only made her forgot hor angor bat buried her deep in anxiety.

Mais Ge or protext, meant to deosive or mislead,
arae—oa ivory 5 Ae the outer gato; ace-com.  grrift—The
top-most room of a mansion ( @hfsiea ). Bo in Priya IV,
au ag ie att ut geet feet. sire afer:
is a dramstical teobnicslity; it meaus—is discovered
the curtain b-ing lifted up.

P, 63. 81.1. gqam:—sllaying, mitigation, st aPe—is
betterthan g7@, as we havo it already in the frst line... gat
arm:—aeo p. 54. erx—thick; thie {s novessary to make the
tandal-foice compare with the tonch of hor band.

81 2, qaH—Unsteady, in motion; hence, diMieult to hit,
vd qian 1 io dical to bo eon, blag stomle senalag
to the Noisésikes.. This adda to. tho diffioalty. Of, wat CRA: )
qoieafid Praae Gree wi Tark.—Ken. -i—simaltancousl
In tho ficst place, ib was difivult to bit the mind Kéma, boing.
the groniest marksman, could havo ab the most it it:with’
One strow, But here the wonder was that it was hitqrith
{GL tho arfowe| dad at one and the sume time, ‘This Aamoant
fotndioate that his aliction was very grost, ov tin goe

ed,



--- Page 276 (OCR) ---
52 [Act I,

gamaert—faargy v. 1. one having wn odd number of
(4 e-five ) weapons (arrows); the God of love. It also means
‘one whose wenpons aro hard.’

81. 8, watraea—na® eet CasIEy) AAT aA oeG
aR. oreaftui—i.¢, suforing from  love-torment, being
sparated trom thelr beloveds.

P. 64. Fesett—(@tram wait fee quite reversed. affrar
ott orm af mid from mie stg, water + af, stg being changed
to fatter (@, area, ora propositicn. fame g¢—The relation
in now seon to be roversod. For the catia ( the state of betng
five), which bulooged to your arrows, has now beon transferred
to grits they being reduced to the stato of five (led to death);
while ortauzy, which formerly belonged to the gifts, ha
now been tranaferted to your arrows, apgat—low that Tam
hit and so know it by personal exporience, syeafagz—and
hhenoe moro to be foared. etit+}—the vebemenco or impetuo-
sity of. omiiedurerat: #. —'er asoamalated
anger. Bearer aT ge TAT:
tenses move,’ range of. Tho Quoon bi
Baga, thin doce not augur well for her, waféest—Lit. one
practising penance and thus without the mesnt of telf-protes-
tion; hence, one ing protestion or pity, helpl

81, 4. fftur—She felt ashamed because she loved one
‘who was ( according to her present position at least ) beyond
hdr! setchi; Rvgd—shame with confusion, ayfgat—beoanse
friends smile, wr¥F—Both gro and wavy are used. ray
‘uneasiness or diequietude of theming; cf. srqurear@iaaysuaTe gt
ava, Sik. IIT. p. 68; oF doop pain, anguish. fege—Feamt g

ove unable to undertake any re-ponibility;
discontolate; of. ngnageleaitgcrg Mal.

Kandémbt boing
the capital. rqrst—By firq he means the mecting with
Sgariké arranged by him,

P. 65. avifeanafie—The King wanted to know only,
about the well-being of Sigariké; but now ho was to have an
interview with her, ‘This re fore, preferable to
aittrarifegst. gaty—Tho Vidd. is proud of the success
achieved by him in his mission,

‘qeeTTt—ayat fs Lis insortod and q dropped when the
somp, refers to the deity of that nome, otherwise gyri,

ay.



--- Page 277 (OCR) ---
et I. ] 68

a wg FHA—Tho kings pays « compliment to the Vidd. by this
Be means—There is nothing to be wondered at in this, This
is nothing compared to what your wit can achieve. ge—
‘Tho comp is faulty ; geq should not have boon compounded.
‘The readings here are not vers eatisfactory,

P. 66. qégrrefo—The Sun is here represented as a
lover going to meat bis bride, the evening-tsay, according to
his engagement with her. This ie quite in keoping with the
matter in band, Tho King also will shortly do th

areving.e. —argoit the westorn quarter, presided over
by Varuga. The west is also represented as the bride of the
sun; of. miguiaerferrarmaea er geaxacrn: | ate Fe
wit euvt HifemegeeRageiser mVik.-Oh, XI. 0. srqeefe—
fq goes with grad, aniis agdagaaig; sang seligeT
‘cfr moves toward

SI, 5, ‘Tho ides worked out herein is this—The chariot
of the San has bat ono wheel; so he is anxious as to how it
will be able to travel round the world the next day, being
weakened by ite journey round the world that dey, He,
therefore, rests on the peak of the setting-mountain, pulls off
the wheel of the direetions and onrrios it off with him, as it
were, that it shoald serve as tho sooond wheel for his chariot,
ease: —Cf. warts wi gamainar: em ge Perera aT
chen: refaria 1 efeaketanrd afarernereen ame: fara: Ht
aia gat aie i; also qeyeT ea ara Feat MOAT EAT |
armmras Baett aueast AweTse W Dandin. mrej—to come
to the point of starting (the rising mountain ).

dhargur o—aige wiped of, anatohed awa
sonse age 4: Te aeq Kum. IL. 31. ogee l-
drawn awoy, i.e, contrasted, meaniog nearly the
sfewe— tea ‘com, tho rays of th
shooting upwards in all direstions and of a golden hue at dusk
are hore spoken of as the spokes of the fgeam. ‘Tho sun's
chariot is golden (ef feronta Gita ra &e Rigveda I. 95,2),
0 itis bat proper that the spokes of its whacle also should
be golden, {tats eee 0. 1, where the Instr. {4 gar (on
ccount of). eareifan e. L—qualifies a5 this menn—twho
has the cirole of spokes in the formof bis rays ready.” This isnot
40 satisfactory as the rexding in tho text. egeigare e, Z.—means
“ihe line of spokes of which is touched ( seized ) by the sun
swith his gr, ( ray4j-—bande ) for drawing it towards biiealt,”

collection.



--- Page 278 (OCR) ---
54 [ Act IIL.

"This yields a good sense, but then itis not o'ear what the
Tareas is made of.

P. 67, Bl 6. ‘Inthis al, the dsyctusplant ( aftt ),
which closes its fowors at aunast and opovs them at mantis
described as the sun’s spouse, consol d by him at the time of
his departure to the nether world. ‘The soate of a lover eonto-
ling his bolovod at the timo of eeparstion ia alto hinted at,
Itis fully expleined in the com, gqyaz%—This reading is
preferable to exgy For the girgigofr is spoken of here as
HI on account of the closing up of the Lotuses; and as {5
the eye that is closed in sl-op, it follows that the ng is
regarded as the eye of the afar. Cf. in this respect the later
half of the 41. from the Vikram.~O, quote above; slao nage
sohera egurad ager negeeis viet Vik. L 8. maa in
the seoond case moms‘ baving lotas-like eyes.’ qaa:—
(1) time; (2) may also moan condition, agreement, eis. gar &o.
searaat—conviotion, assurances (11 at se should feel cheer fal).
wiefeet—(@) having a lotus in her band (for sport). Poots
represent young girls as carrying a lotus in their hands for
sport; of. rarwaeraifn aaaiaie et | Kom VI. 84 gat
Sherrer do, Megh. LL. 2. qo:—(2) a clover lover. seeqntm 6e—
(2) with bis rays resting on the sctting-mountain; (2) with
his hand placed on her drooping head.

‘This #1. {8 quoted in the D.-! ‘an instance of qarere
param ( that which indicates, by the mention of something
extraneous, the matter in band that is begus or is about to
happen, boing characterized by parity of situation or attri-
butes ) by similar situation,

aeeigia—rendered dento and magnided, Darkness cover
{ng the intervals botween the lines of forests mado them appear
Tike a compact mass and alto extendod their limits, SPram+,
situation, arrangement, grqur+—This added to thoir dark
nese, efac—Btout, fat (bring well-developed ond advanced
in age). Such only are quito dark.

P. 68, @Rrarg, &e—Some read et before this, but
there is no special ronson for tho King to feol joy hero,

41. 7, gaafy—The root eq, though not mentioned
by Panini, ie recognized by later writers, being included in the
gufe list ( gudimaretineae ), snd is often used by poeta,
of Froud: voratt Uttar, I. 81; faieae’s eafnar eifae
Bhatti, XII 69; qquafe gatié wifsar grageq! Side EL 8h



--- Page 279 (OCR) ---
Act II. ] 55

srourn Rett—arrar sft Ree © F, nottied ty Mer, Toglekar, i
better, a2 the darkoees would envolop all space at once,
eqefrarma—Ths comp. msy also be taken as sifteg gulet
grienma (the diforent parts of the city) q It is vavaral
that the King should speak o ains and treos in the
@istanos in general wed the di ts of thd eity Im portle
euler, Peart —Donom, fe. fay (fae: 8) BTA CF
areeeveas eietew zat avi Mrch 1.94. guages —The neck
of Hara is taken ag a stindard of blacknors,ontog to ite
bolng tarnod black as tho effust of the Héiduole polson drank
by bim.

dam—fatermized, in clove 0
Rrovigar— mised together, solidified,

SL. 8. qrai—a row, also crit. According to Prof.
o this ine ie quoted in coum, as grote wrerat
Siapteaweangatiarary. qee—The trumpet fower-tree
Mardin’ gedit). Kes flowers have a good emells of. Stk.
aeadatgrananar: 1 8

P. 69, srarare—The repetition indicates frequency,
having inbaled tho emell every time.’ fava{—varlous; each.
‘tree was known by tho peculiar snl ef ite Bowers. feqerac-
safanta feat simply moans ‘excessively cense’, ‘The comp,
should properly be eqaaifga: according to tho role sits
ayrseasneegierar: (sige) Php. Vi. 9. 3. ‘Tho present
instance may be treated 1s a cato ef poetic Tivence, Cf. for a
sluilar use gantaasigrwaa: | Kir. V. 2) aaafaeni@ gaan
Um: wrefert wegeragar: | Ragh. XIX, 83, Prof, Ray defends
tho gm here by referring to the dictam qmaneaatelt aquest
aif Prrarte—Some read extpgate as one comp.; but it
was not porsible for the Vidii to eve tho bees rotiling om
Aiswore; bo could only aco them coming to the garden. sire
fn exceedingly gratifying frngrance

weqr—emooth, garenia—fecling or experiencing ease
or plensare; pre, p. of the denom. of Ge (EAE, BU +ETE)-
It is properly the person walking that feols the pleature, bat
it ip transferred (avaits) to sender. qYwe—This i
fo remind the King of tho plan srttled, that ho should not
take Sage. for the real Qaoon. aitf%—sti ange, which cannot be
sxpldtoed, eftarfex—dinregarding, slighting, not caring fox,
Lo Bh. 10» 81.9, Faue—bright, ebeerfol. cara—throngh
Plessnva.; cmafantt—such acts on her part, please the lonet

act with each other.



--- Page 280 (OCR) ---
56 [ Act In,

all the more, diatat—waiting in the place appointed or
keoping the engagement,

wa Rd renr-—an Ueuifeh © 7. is foulty, a8 we have to take
Tecourte to wigware, AH being ovunected with aq, axPeee=
siftg ‘to go to mest a lover with earns] desire,?

P. TL. gareqora:—This in order that he should not be
Recognined. ger egziy &e—Tue Vidi, wanted to compliment
Saga, by saying that sho lookod exustly liko Vésav+0 porfeet
was the disguite, VAsav., however, understood him to mean—
This is clearly Queen Vévar. (and not Ségarika ); and henco
her confusion garq—You whoee object is foiled; unfortunate
one. sgegF yNeEBA!—Alter this some editions have—
Were—( sinanamd |) wargiaso7 get areqaeriaath
(with your body hidden ) wy (4. 6. donot rise) ira afgeiioey
‘Artrqwea (the continuoas flow or depth of love). Wo should
havo inserted this in tho text, It is natural for Vésa. to
wish that the moon should rise a little later; so that the
might hear the King actually profeising his love for Shgariks,
withous the fear of her identity being discovered,

P. 712, s&—expresaes surp
(epesnreney). But this speceh of the King cannot be
switaara as it is heard by the Vidistaka,

Sl, 10, arg—Atite beginning, saz: supply firat-
aM. wrei—p. p. p. of of with, siflj clove at hang, im.
minent. Cf. for the idea eae qa ide: fies eeMARTITETATEN
Sfeseea (84k. IIT. 10,
srerat is eons with a great longing. Some
sm raaearine Qgar api ga avon F aTaTAt
angesvat fagdai: uj oar Pritt greatly, excessively war au. fr
Grarti—This is necessary; other wise he might oscape when
the mistake is discovered, by aaying—T did not addr
Sigs, but you’,

51, 11, cexrer§—The intertor of plantain treo (i.
the stump deprived of its onter skin) which only rerenbles
the thight in colour and plumpness; A fiat Instr. ‘Tat
according to some, (Ax whon used as an garcg hav the sense
of gra ‘equal; in this case it is a freventa (emia ged),
OF eapank et | featerasieramaiertiostes: | Amare, ‘The
Tar is cold, and the comparison to that is appropriate here
(though otherwise found fault with by Kalidis—qeraijear:

Some reed for thie—



--- Page 281 (OCR) ---
Act IIL, J 07

epreifitrer: to. srerengateearrere: Kum. 1. 86)
was suffering from a foverish heat. qurattat—This also may
bea Bab. or « faeegara like the above. Faragy-—Cf Ul. 1,2
of fl, 9 supra, Feyrift—norveloss, languid. qézig—shows
his impatience. fratga-oav, of a wish fir, to soothe,
to gladden.

P73. ereferat:—From wperashuoss, precipitanoy and
af 3E( FH); t00 com. fem ty dismissing all foar
and reserve (atthe thought that heis the King ). Frea—
always, without cessation, gzt—in ill-homour, agfma—tr.
aw *bitter;” seo com, myree—Ho meuns to #05—The harsh
words constantly gratiog against tho cars have made them
harsh; #0 something soothing must be pat in. Let your ewoet
words dothat. srigae—She menos that Vasan, also has
uttored equally bitter word:

P74, eafteafy—Sho meant—You will have to repent
afterwards for having utte! words when your plan is
drought to light and you pay the penalty for thst

ondindifinn: (an tho moon is at the time of
rising). Tho check of a delicate and fatrskinned woman is
tinged red wich the flush of anger.

&1, 12, eaenre--Whon the moon appeared on the top
of the rising-mountain he was of a pale-white coloxr, while
the faoo of Ségarika bad all the splendour of the fall moon.
Now the poot, by moans of an Uspretai’ (read in the com,
Szararaiezat instead of eaiaat) makes the King say—-Look,
there is the moon, with uplifted Karas ( rays-bands), ready
to retaliate as it wore, on Gading his splendour totally robbed.

wp traeei—-natural dolnces of intellect, want of disere-
tion; alto exaed (aaaizigrt) waterinees, the moon being
tuppoted to be formed of waters of wien’ mfiim eaeiiamat
agRaarenst Mra grata Ge. Varthemibire: and agit sreeraat
a weet aedife Fergaw | quoted is K-P. X.

G1. 18, Tho moon's ote (want of diserotion) is ox-
plained in this 41, ‘The various purposes served by the moon
fro also served by the face. Agsin, the moon of the face is
flways present and fall, while the rosl moon is not ; 40. the
latter should have had the disorotion not to rite; but be has
igen; hence his orze

‘eita—(1) overshadows, eclipses; (2) destroys, causes, to
ikappoar; because day-lotusos fade at moonrise, HaeRtTRe=



--- Page 282 (OCR) ---
58 [ Act In.

of scenes aft: oft ge Raterradt ML—MGdh, TL, 8397 et Fem
it does (soe com). qeikastea—(I, 2) of love oF gassion,
So Bhavabhiad: este aapreiit (areat ) Mal-Msdb, IT. 6,
Tho moon also ie au idly of passion, of SAK TIL, 9) afd
stergeatt aga: wage azarae: 1 Sis. IN. 42; Nigudkear Shse

quots—aaiateg & BEI eee sIRGITE | SReeTER me qeat
afta! oft u Harivanda, Inthe second ease wae may also
meta ‘the ocean’ whote waters begin to swell at moon-rise
(areforence to the flow of tide), qeidt—agaitg rq this is
Répake, spgra.-Some read gaqedi; but spyga: better
accords with the proceding afaa: and feara:. eae waite Ree
fra: siatgseate fa the reading found in the Rass
geighdhara, ‘This live with tho reading stxgua: is quoted in
the K-P. with the remark six sroraiiedhqasls gTeRET
after eome Gaal aTAoT I.

wayia—The Instr is tat, ‘owing to the p ion of’,
freandt—feeesem: sat: Fesarge: e comp. of the armmiuaTy
Covanagah (a) elsee; ferarae cit get meaargaifaeary Vaoene
( im bis weergyr ), sta ieeaiey will give ater
freq. fassiamat a where gz has the sense of
gea ard is dropped. ‘Tho Iowsr lip of a  b:autifal
woman is often likered to the Dimba frait (in Marathi hed
which when ripo is bright-red); of. fremat wqatr Sagat
frarer: Sak. Vi. 20; gevmuiamnte 84. X. 63 ug
Fremracist Megh. IL. 7) gat qucracfaewstersq Nal. VIE. 63.
‘The Sgures of speach in this 4]. aro aye and Hdteei; and
according to some atga.

P. 75, sfiftarigra: &e--As the King was caught rod-
handed, the Vid. thinks that the purisnment to be meted ont
would be sevore, sxequmifn—'o another, vis. to Stgarika,
seat wari aioe; stent takes Fez hy the volo gars gira

2. The pr os eons ‘muse. when parts of a comp. oF

T. 76, eara——an offence, an anwortby cr reprehensible
aot, a ixaus gression
81,14, srarmat—araits arse mar ar Seater sree |
aPrédi Tat. firsq:—embarrassud, or fall of shame. fqaef:—~
a: NSE: eT one who hus lost his eolonr, on account of
the consciousness of having done something wrong, hence)
wicked; or qx} may mean praise (¢g'@:); one who is not to: be

ined, é.6 deserves to bo condemned in the end this meant



--- Page 283 (OCR) ---
Act ILL. } 59

srargat—aran a kind of rod dye largely used by women
in ancient times for dro

o soles of theit foot and sometimes

thir lip, Cf 2 eet were: eal
Sak. LV. 6, =

fig tree), and somo other trees. [i princtures its bark, whence exudes

rrounds itsel? in a kind of
nest, and which, when dry, may be broken off snd weed for various
purposes.”

apai—i.«, by rabbing the hod against the fost, atare
ara-—aaeim is an oslipse (rig )j the moon when celipsed
appears reddish; angrr ie hers compared to Raho, eclipsing
the moon of tho Quven’s fuce, Cf. taoieedreerewirveragaTeTe
‘ewes &o, Mél~Madb, IL p, 76. ‘Lhe removal of the dash
of anger from the nee dopeaded on ber boing apy
and that was possible only if she relented, a@

a resinoae milky juice with whick it

eed,
aod x8 an ade
qe means ‘great? or ‘only’ (az); so GE means ‘toa great degree
(if you will bo excoedingly kind to me )’ ; of, ‘only’,

ted—i. oh can easily transfer ite love
to another, Althougis thero it an air of despsir and resigna-
tos im this speech of the Queen, yet the use of the third perton
and ite very tone express her groat rorontment,  arafeea—
fe. qrat sharp, penetrating intellect; see com j ‘oa who can
not read the King’s mind correctly’, srm—in this ont, i
when the King’s hoart is quite alienated from me, and attached
to another.

P. 17. arcouetted—which
and henco is useless; hevce, any useless or futile attempt,
alt He meant—The Queen did not inflict corpo-
oa! punishment upon ug; is not that a favour? eegafe—Be-
‘onuso tho Vidé, spoke'in a jesting tone inclading bim ale
his romark segaait. Of: a ad afteromra: | Vik. TL p, 60.
the knowledge of the love-intrigue by the Queen
ted the parsiblity of hoe commiting vuleidu du GAY bbouat.
‘This is expleined in the next dloma. eadae:—orl. Cw
sories.ot misfortanos ) is bad, as only ono sraet is :roforred
foin the next $l. omeg:—o. l ‘9 source of calamity,! ie good
‘Gp llsalt; but it doce not harmonize with siyafee
Ge Ae AS. eraysat—grow in intensity, | doveloped “er,
‘ove to the highest pitoh, eagarara—On sccount of our ‘affee.

treacherous, w

wnuot be heard by another



--- Page 284 (OCR) ---
60 [Act rn,

tion being mutually estoemed. Some read gareaufi@: a8 one
word, making it an attribate of far. This makes the con-
struction smooth, no doubt, But the first better explains why
the King also should not have been guilty of such conduct
and why the Qaven ehovld resent it to mach, s¢qigi—%
aa er age, day by day. far go--Thie is the calamity
ed by tho King. nezeq &o—Hen: dadty eafedt any
blandoring with rogurd to &e.; or better, Zrm: may bo takon
with sifge@h, to far-gone love any failing on one’s part &0,;
of in thie ease goea: govdisaga: Vik, LV. p, 93.

aH: afYare &e.—Ae Bégs, entors alone, tho plan settled
tooms to be that Sagarikt, to avoid euspicion, should go alone,
dressed as Visava., and that Susamgaié should meet her at the
rendeavous, though sho started to go, the thought
troubled her that she might bave beea watched (a8 appears
from her words earfe = wfaeiea ) and hence her zB. Notice
the reading cer aupata faeteantedaionfediar (ill-trained,
impradent ) %a1(7 &c.5 see foot note.

P, 78, gg:—dazed, ou: of one’s wits, aR—i. 2, to
ensure the safety of ‘Sageriké, gradBegarag—Alter
reflection Sage, comes to the conclasion that the Queen was sure
to get knowledge of the meeting arranged between her and the
King, and that abo, hucting hor out there, would subject her
and ber friend to the sovorent robuke and ill-treatment, Hence
hor resolve to put au end to her life, @¢—means mare (a little )
fird (something to bo protorred out of two alternatives
although iteelf not much desirsble). gftqar—insultingly
tronted,

P. 19, syarut—Euving no one to look after, forlorn,
starar—having no ono to protect, holploes. Or, as areg meand
‘a master,’ and hence a protector,” grea may be taken in ite
second senso of yg or shelter, sbolterless
eu ma ered a Ha: eM; te. EHO. Bre
‘8 roprohonsible decd; bore 5 as the soso of aimTgeq.

G1. 10. gr: gaeatsat &5,—The Queen might say-Now
that you do not caro for me, woy do you soak tosave my life?
Expooting su:b a question the King says—It is not so. muah
to save your lite that I am trying, but to save mine; tor
WH Grge ko, fr}—Dy addressing hor thus, he roasauros. hor
of his love-You are atill my darling. ’



--- Page 285 (OCR) ---
et UL] bi

Sa at qt Tem—Eo,—The sight of her lover inspired
Jove of life in her; but that was only for a moment; the next
moment she thinks of carrying out her firtt resolvo.

P. 80, 81. 17, srftart—Adv. moditying Say ud
stood; of. 7 ag A By Bre aed SidiegTeRT Std aEINE
waren: | Nég. 111. eieqaty—For it was alrcsdy goamq,
wife@t—and 80 she could provent bis life from going o
SIEII—The noose formed by the arms, which is necossary
to chain life to his body. This may also mean ¢ your excellent
arm,’ waver: ag: STATE, a8 Grey 1# one of the words expressing
exeellence, the comp, being of the Nitya class, ack gear
evil mizaq—Hlore we aro to suppose that tho Kiag not Say
fastened her arm round his neck but also embraced her (the
reading oz ugieer makes it clear), a8 appears from IV. 2
and 3, srr gf:—A shower without the appearance of eloude
and which, therefore, is not expooted; hence, tho sudden
eccurrence of anything that is weleome; of. saiwigg a¢ Kam,
1Y. 645 feemaanm: gure: Mél -MAdh, X. 10,

srqrerarare—which will blow off the show

P. 81, ya qe mat &o—Kilich, meant—Both of you
are, in a way, guilty now--be of infidelity to you. you of
want of courtesy or breach of decorum. So if you go and
forgive him now, he only will remain a gia, as he has ro
exense for his conduct.

gi. «, one who doos not know how to rospond to acts
of love. sranfy--although Ihave actually pléced your arm
round my shoulder.

P. 82. After qut @ii(t some read ermt—oneataadra
fo wee foot-note, But the verso doos not seem to be
genuine, It is not in Harsh tis out of placs after
faeresmeiear: fiscraé; it repeats ideas thet have already
ccturred. ‘The exprewion sguifitiews®: is wapestie,

‘welizefioaa—By false coustety or display of anreal
love. By this sho refers to the King’s words fia. do.
(117), eraaar aft:, and RaeuaaT freee: fiery.

§. 18 agwifrarese—The King menos’ to’ eay.
behaviour towards tho Quoon was simply © matter of formality
apt the Quovn's high birch and lotty wbaraitet. Tb wag
dry Mhing'¢ wanting tn re) atter all; while my eal os
only poteens.” © ‘ ie wkd

am, 6



--- Page 286 (OCR) ---
62 [ Act Iv.

s ironical and is meant to exprose her

arate, bo. —Thi
and’s behaviour

great rosontmont. qeej-in keeping with a bu
towards his loving wife,

P. 83. sifga—Deluded, wrongly made to believe. gaq=
{ll-conccived polioy; refers to the meeting planned by him,

P. 84. srqagoaat—Had she a good stock of r
merit she could have died as
have ended. The reading ganaraqudigacarens gemar a Tea
in a goneral statement, intonded to support particular case,
simrft . 1, ia bad as it has to be taken in the sonso of art
according to the principle qqammmerien. frverart-being
subjeated to misery,

Pattiiae—For, usually, whenever tho Quon saw the
‘King, a loving smile bloomed on her face. qeizq—well stored.
up, gone to ite climax. gdtaq—e. 1, which gradually (as each
ingident happened) rose up (swelled), meat #. 1 also
moans the same (stvilgar oz gear). qarare—atoreiter
ive. in the three ways montioned before, gaicer—e. 2. is
‘bad, for sirt#7 means ‘what one undertakos,’ or an undertaking;
or an act on one’s part; so this will mean ‘ pained or mado
uneasy by evory act or effort of mino,’ but this has 20 con.
nexion with what prooed

ACT ly.

B. 8. wemrae—eaee ©. 1. contd fA asler oseTES
@e sae; here sy (sige), which is added wAf and
areuisd, ia irrogular, an 377 is not included inthe liat of the
roots that take it, Nigudkar Séstrt derives it in another way.
for which see com. fy —is used hore in the of seta
orentreaty, She addresses Fate entreatingly that it should
relent and favour SSgariké. eraraira—uarite amid, |
(ore) being added exras (erat wrareut} now see com, afearga— |
‘give? for this veneo of. aftr: nfacrmart &o. Bh, Nits gay
erar riaaretiat Bak. IV. p. 87.

P. 86, seign—ag means here ‘silk’; cert sige
gta. @ eg—aeks a question with a hope tothe contzary j,
‘has s thishap &e,, I hope not;’ of, + wg mavMeat api, Vik,
IL, p: 66; Kum. 1V..24,  sqeerf—a grost mishap or calam-,
Lay Cate sided Gr TR 5 of an ‘not involving risk to lias



--- Page 287 (OCR) ---
Ao IV.) 68

meant meron: wT aiteraefer s 1 Amara, Cf. ty Prmearai-
fea Sik, 1. p. 27; war srearigagaeerq Vik. IV. p. 92 ; for
A. cogeik Renreanignar fed vq Vent. 11.

tierm—Some read after this gy weft ure &e. ( 800 foot
note} but this is quito ont of place in the Vidé.’s mouth.
wréqzaraawer eR—Although such was not the injunction of
Bigs., Bueamgath says it purposely to induce Vasan. to take
it, that it might bo
thereby.

P.. 87, {eR geare—Whon suoh is the drift of oiream-
stanoea, at such a juncture; i. e., when Stg.’s life is in peril.
wear: sere TaTTa:—Here gains means ‘acquisition’ ( 51ft );
40 war gata: also.

ee
s(t) sx@5 ‘that by which ono is surrounded or over
any attecdant thing; of. tar uitsaqerta Regh.I.19; a garment,’
dross; hore, an ornament. xprgme—seo com. Hore man is

used in the sense of eran; of aga greaft wat &o. Ragh.
1.18. aefirarat—e. 1 agra afin (ge) Gear ‘ot noble
birth in better.

61, ear€:—sarer in deceit, a feint (intended to mislend)s

com, ‘The King had to take oaths to aseuro. the Queen of
his future Bdolity to hor; but hetook caro to uso words convey
ing one meaning to the Queen, while, at the samo time, they haa
another which would leave bim free to puriue his love-
intrigue, orator Gter—Whonever the King met the Qnyen,
ho showed that. he was greatly athamed of his past gondact,

earefe, &o.—The constr, is 7 f aT AeaTp TUMAT. SAT EAT
seaelta: MET THONAT L, REMTAT Ty HONER (tO hee

ernal disposition) meqrafe—P., 4, janet t9 good, as
is requires a great desl of twisting to, take it in. the seuse.of
‘reconciliation’; it properly meana ‘olose contigalty or, epnnex:
Tbanoe, close adherence to feoonailiation.. seaypftme. 3%
aro. L—makes the construction smooth. (341_age. RAIReaT?
itracere &o. ), but then qx and ey lose thetr foreo; #09 com
P, 80) ermftenfirede Although wo’ aro told in
UTP 16 that: three things » troubled -him;; the: frst two'wers
fof vital importance to him, ois. the reconoilistiow ofthis |
“ Gaouyi€ wo no,\ ha fearod, would puban end to her lift e
‘HIE 15) aid) the “plight: of Stgarikt. Towa fps dr



--- Page 288 (OCR) ---
64 [Act iv.

suziety about the first now; but Stiga. still continued toh
in tho seme miserable 4 the thought about thai troubled
him, Why should it do sof Why not forgot her? He
fssigns the re.son_ in the next $1.; Siga, was in bis heart; if
the was uneasy. ho was also uneary,

81.2. sraa2 Aata—This may be quostioned; for al
though the King embraced her, Siya, remained apatheti
feo p. 81 ( fenemft avreanat &o.). Tho gar not being on
Biga’s part theffeq is inconocivable. Again, the idea of
fiers door not woll harmonize with the compurison to the
intecior of a lotas, which is easily crushed, bat does not melt,
Is mast be remembered, however, that the King is speaking
under distraction, eartfi—The pl. is used because five holes
‘wore made by the five arrows, Stiga being liquefid entered
bis heart throagh these five channels, This al. is given in
the Subhavhitaveli as Srivarsua’s, undor the heading ferigat
Ratan, sith the second line read ee amzyeraniaa fala.

safeararaiy be. ~C/. carganrt Magar er: Sik. VL p-
10. eergatarste—OF seriveaeat p. 49. RedParae:—Tho moon
appearing on the 2nd night of the bright half of a lunar month
which is creva a Car) a
Ite appearance is bailed with gre
the peuple.

P. 90. 61.8. mnt—Very much, greatly, srgfers-afyor
is one who is goverous minded, noble. He meszs—-Séga, died
tor me; but I did not follow her, boing sigfgm. fare Hea-
Thie may 'mean—you should be kind tome and grant my
Fequest; of rather, I was siqftjm towards her; you at least
bo giggar and follow her eqmmfarft—He means~Althoagh step-
ping like an elephant sho walks fast, ( An elephant, although
apparently walking slowly, is « swift walker ).

P. 91 Pegtrat—Seo coms sigily tr. stgoyt ot (or at)
motos ‘regard oF cousidoration for’ ( which makes one 1v0k to
the interest of others ). Farqitfiyar e. 1—the state of being
rogurdlons, want of eonslderation for 5 wig Prawn (arg.
AWA wee wie:, Frcarare. ! —pitil
the nobility of Vidé.'s mind. Although the necklace wat
sven to him, be says that it was sent for the king.

S14. geareeur—tor his body also had. obtained Baga’:
‘Soar and then lost it

P, 92, yf—contentment, keeping the mind at ease, It
{s one of the 88 Vyabhiohgribhévas; nee D.-B, IY. 12. 9ftr—

rere... Rftar—Mark



--- Page 289 (OCR) ---
‘Act IV.) 68

1. (keep up ) lites-—has no propticty. agra —ts a cane-

stnG, usoally worn by door-teopora; ef, Kom, IU, 45; Bagh.

VL26  wagua—o J. there is no special reason why Vaso.

should have worn a sword, as the times were not turbalont and

the prople enjoyed the blessings of pence; sao T, 9 supra,

arftrter:—Vor the deriv. #60 oom. (sindtiga). egvra:—The
1 of the indnitive is dropped before mim and Hag.

P. 98. aftqrre—The threo of the four constituents of
fan avcient Indian army, the cbariote being dropped by
time, as too cumbrous for adeane-d warlere, Comp the
desoription hore with that of the expedition against Vindbys
Kota, at p. 6, Priy. girere—difioult to be kept baok, irreist-
ible, gareqfag—to arrange in battle-order, gfeaa—This
Insalt, ei, the blocking up of the passage. gifenk—a multl-
tude of lepbants, aya EY—Tho Vid., of course, says
this for fon,

81, 5. wewi—a ee eet afeeegain amar aur. Reeae
gort—shows the vastons of his army, eqnardteeeda—
Goat an army, benoe a multitade ; site a elore and compact
array ,3°q formation. @arg—may go with Agwy or better
with aed. oafm:—As Rumanvat's invantry advanced to moot
the oppoting force, it was crashed by the elephants of the
Kosala king, oaftt—s. L—owaia: after: wud 8
‘WiewfeaiAs in this care the qeq: are to be taken as belongiog
to Rumanest. geiega—opposed, ariseant—The objict
etired wasa duel with the Kossla~king. exe-may mean joy,
or, botter, his ardour or ebivalroas pint, qiisomfie—
». Lis bad, as it makes no sente; for sify menue REST SEH;
to the meaning will be ‘ whose vigour was doubled by the
anaioty wished for by him,’ but this is absard, So, to give it
some meaning, tbe sift must be taken to refer to the enemy
(ait: aif: ta) which is not dizcotly got from the compound.

P. 94 8, srareqere—The readings bere aro unioertals,
‘Asit ip, tbo comp, mst bp taken at ats enn ferret: at
aif) aasusiventia + AMRIT Bra But this gives ries
foan awkward comp, ‘Tho. teadiog sumtere "it -aleo. note
isfactory. It meaus ‘thrown off disorderly’ ( srearfa = suet!
‘); Goattered pell-mell’ Prof. Bay takes rzeq in the sonte of
Cupitiroed.?,, Dissolve in thie case stent «mit nent
fireenfer Meare: owwet: Sarr Go. myet—thore Hewat



--- Page 290 (OCR) ---
6 [ Act IV

sah Reventeeh eran: testo. 1. grammatically wrong,
sirga—@ with oft in tho senso of ‘to challenge? is A'tm,
Geaviarnre: | srex | gamTgatt). TBREiete—becoming opposed
to wy oF doteats encouraging his soldiers to Sight and notallow-
ing them to give way. it mart aa 0, Z—‘when the main
body of the army was broken had given way ).’ This reading
is better as it praises the valour of the Kotnla-king and
thereby brings into greater relist the prowess of Rumapvat,
‘The epithet eisfy alto becomes more appropriate in this ease,
Somorend after this—qrar—wunratareatt waif waft 1 But,
ss observed by Prof, Ray, it is no‘ clear that tho main forve
that was broken belonged to Ramanvat, till tho addition of
he fourth line, In the absence of the fourth lino tho nqrage
‘would appear to be of siruwait so the interruption is proma-
‘taro and absurd,

sentafPret—air area eae eft ret; eTEHe—e. J. (600 th
Roto ) is rejected as rere is unnecessary, sym being duo to marc;
sgata; we are not told that Rumanvat’s army consisted of
lephante for the most part; and even supposing he took with
him the clophants from the enemy's army, he could not have
fakenioll, etaat werere:—aeelat wereig: 6.25 in this caso
Fay Would mean tho rovnlt of, i.e. a reward worthy of.

P. 95. Uexwifem—ramre magic (emer unt ATA
dooeit, illusion; Indra is the prosiding god of magic, Some
feknrey toomentt’ cenient ); qegsrtter fiearé; oF see com.
Pitot barieh ot ponccck’s foattives carried by jogglers
‘sad: magicians; which they wave tbout to produce a’ sort of

hypndtio influoses on ‘thy ‘eyes of the spectators before
whom they perform,

S17. ‘The reading game ait violates the’ metre,
sFerE—tied up, inseparably connected with. yarmré any.
wraret c. 1‘ who derived knowledge of magic by direst
intuition’-i ¢, “magic appeared, of iteelf, to Indra, who had
Rot to rosort to any other indirect means,” (Ghat

‘werreg-—Name of « domon, regarded as tho patron of
magic, as also the composer of several incantations: Magis if
called great sar adter him, Ho carried off Pradyamaa and
‘throw bim into the rea, but was alsin ‘by chim afterwards]
srargae—is' #, prevowned tor’ bis magleal’ skill.: geé
Fwaeteraa: ¢.2-pWlio-gonid tako is good view of the wholé
mrorld ( by his magical gower ). adele a,



--- Page 291 (OCR) ---
Act IV. J ot

P. 96, 1, 8. fig weo—Some read f& with By and the
lino as wqoite fara &o, “Wo soo from this,” remarks Wilson,
“that the pretensions of the neoromancers of India were not
Inferior to thote of their brethren of the west, nor of dis-
similar purport.” fig agar do—This ie read as the frst line
of tho next i], instead of eq to., as fi aay Ear.
ayite®—By this be sieans that he would also show
Shgetiké, whom tho King longed so much to see.

sv aaeat ste 7g—In some editions these words ate omitted j
and the epesoh is given as gnetons (i... a8 addrented to the
magician.) srqerq—selt-ooafidence(with which be has speker);
or this may mean sityem tho beginning, the preliminary part.

zeagia;—Seo com; Viea’s father was tho ruler of
Dijayinf, to which the magician belonged.

P, 97. grffiges—Properly, tho patornal relations ; hore,
all those connected with her father’s house, arfiga—s. J
means the came thing—those connected by the navel or womb,
Aescondante of tho samo parents, @iqvarey GaTHa: Amara,
ayara:—Kitich. gives a different colouring to the Quesn’s
remarks. goafate:......0gore:. She meant—It is not undue
partiality that you have for the magician jit is tho high regard
that you have for those oonnected with your parental, house
that makes you take Interest in him. ‘The reading mige
(arama ) is bad, as Visn,’s mothor did not bolong to Ujjayint:

anffram—i. «. ho has talked boastingly of his own kill
in magic.

Hl. 10, faeg &e—A class of somi-diving beings characr
terized bj groat holiness and purity and having tho eight
superhuman faculties or Suddhis, oft. ster wigat 3 zit
after wer 1 Fea: TO
Hoavonly choristers of bards, whoto duty it is)to: move. sbont
(a8 they have access to any, placo in the universe:.cf. tefaite-
Geuitarerm’: Nog, Y, p, 108.)and, singe, tanga in. praiag of
the, glorious. deeds, of gods or god-like, eerie
veergld ertigred ape a, Vik. pe. graye The heavenly
‘aympbs or Apsaresas ; hore ay means Gh 5, of. EAGT THRE
Bigeh Vik, 3. ;

She By 98... 81 11, . dif: — sell... aaesthe
‘hassoterized by,’, The Insts, is. gua.
Aippotation: and the-speoial names of the



--- Page 292 (OCR) ---
68 [ Act IY

geeecee seer wrateey srry the sea, reef et
erva: sprang from the tea, ‘The celebrated elephant produced
at the charving of the ogcexn and appropriated by Ind
Fasae—The word faza is variously derived, as for: &
stages of lite Bat, they not having the fourth (rbat of oid age);
or gitar qu Ret always in youth ; the word fxr standing for
qdie as in feoras or faargat au ofearoaat Bab. feeme— fit
Sur Pesan fr. fear, Pag. IV. 2101. This is something
like the manquo in the Tempest (of Shakespear.” (Wileon).

P. 99, angaie--sbows that fisrwarg was tho maternal
anole of Vassvadatté megqea—argam means ‘to go forward
to recelve a porton.’ wagure:—bere moms ¢ what improsees a
man with one's dignity, power or greatness? ( s@areadiia |
‘warerg )j hence, magaiicense, grandeur.

SL 12, wrapere—em: (efnga: Te aT an clephant's
chin or tusk ) wearesiit gate: an.elephant ; qaeq erarngy
Ext qagec:—tlso called arugitaq—an elephant of ext
ordinary strength and size and endowed with all the
auspiotons signs, whose po
king, Cf vewaet anima a faafen afafear: 1 a aeugtent
mmpdea(Gneregy Ancient imperial kings had such an
slopbant in their possession, Cf. aeamrqaarar weagferat
eardietegtt (nage fdr) KA. p. 1425 armg feast
Rigear a Kemrarra Wesandicn | omnceane wrefeegeTat AAT
ayeayaraia n Vikra-Ob. 1. 84,

grariie—Perhsps Harsha bad the scone at his own royal
gate in view when he wrote this éloka. C/. Bégw’e doseription
of tho neblo stoods and. the mountain-Iike olvpbant Darpaséra

On, II, It sooms thst the hing’s
pphauts were kept in the spacious
8} of. Kir. I. 16.

P, 100, erat Prem dee —Vasn. was tho min'stir of «
perty king, He bad n-vor witnotsed ench grand scenes as
‘wore prosoi ted to Li aight at the ga'e of Vatssrhja, ‘Ths
fie horse, the wondert: 1 elephant, the edrclave of kings, acd
the m lody of masio so Gilles him with surprise that he I oked
quice bewildered Jike a rus'la gotng to a big olty whird
ovorything is a wonder to him. yt:eiee qapira-the wondsrfal
objects just at the door (what will be tiy state when hall
seo the inside then ). qreats—aih wer ( fl.) also mpfr ©

gion ensured prosperity toa |

ere


--- Page 293 (OCR) ---
ot 1¥. J 0

wre ag Parra &o.— Cf. feaatai—are eerhteat Ree a
aegrangtd Gat ganferarrsrenit | Priy. p. 6.

§1 18, amereq—Tho Kaflchukia is an old man; and gou
ally be refors to bis condition at an old man on his entrance,
Hore the cflects of old age are described as intensified by the
ceottati joy he felt at his belog oble to soe is master alter a
long time. srwafa-A denom. from oe} qt, obanged to ath
sided, intensifies tho meaning.

P. 101, efary:—Agroement; honco, similarity. sergearg
—aihirae 0. 1 sifted Be: Get one blessed with groat
fortune, exceedingly prosperous. gy wed TeHT—as a mark of
grat familiarity and royal favour,

P. 102. oprger ee —qy ‘almost.’ galgeaafe 0. l.—oalge
iv throw into agitation, perplex. Facaft feqett wie—Ho
means to s8y—Eiven if you hesitate for a long timo, you will
have to tell it as it will not be possible for you to
tho fuot from the King; 40 it will be bettor to tell it at once,
ai—Tho King was right in thinking «0, ae the demand was
rade by Yauga, without his knowledge arae—( feaeat | )—
The Quoen smiled boca knew the trath, bein
tothe plan formed by Yangen.; but she gives a
reply, not withing to disclose the plan at this stage, She
could not aay that Varn. wan right, at ia that cate she would
have been forsed to explain the matter; only she did not know
that Sige, wae the maiden sought by the miniater.

wearfir ritee—Some EM. omit sreqr/e:; but it is neoos~
sary, as the King knows then at once thatthe two, Vasubb.
and Babhravya, wero with her on board the same ship when
she was wrooked, And henoe his remark farther on ag atte
a fratry

‘This specoh of Vasubhuti is differently read ( see foot-
olor) baing ampliged a a way in which the entire plan of
Yoogendbarhyans is revesled, Bat the additions are
stideatly interpolations, In the Srat place a politician like
Yangendbardyage war not likely to comounieate bis plot,
which wat kept @ profound seeret, to the minister of the very
‘lng whom he was going to dupe. Even supposing Vasu
Know it, he could pot have given s1oh a detailed accoant of if
‘im the pretence of Varavadatia, nor oonld be have taid to the
Bogs face nea BRM retary RA. RPO



--- Page 294 (OCR) ---
[ Act IV,

pave: afar. Again, Yaug. bimsolt gives out bis plot further
on, s0 its premature dizolosure here destroys the postic effect,
‘And farther, when Yang. comes to the point gf afte-
ware natin aqwea: afgn:, tho King interrupts him, saying
aa: ct 34 ar. This chows that what preceded was not heard
by him and eo was not told by Vasubbati,

aeentindt—aeq: amall sya: share of luck sif@ steers
unfortunste,

P, 108, gegarer aft &o.—g:erareare? gh seet met t
(vex) efor, Nobody onn scrutinize the ways of Fate} no
one knows what Fate may bring to pass; and Ratndvally
too, might have been saved, as theso two wore saved by Fate.

Fardt—frqait is iDlustrated sivas an instance proving
statement; of. fete feateren ® atta gafaatt war! Ragh, VIIT.
45, reid —are @ aTTae, Wa being added wre; of. Sey
and araiqa. It is maze, when meaning gr oF tribute (
saraitir Bik. p. 66 ).

$1, 14, gaqyrrafr—The quadrangular houses sot
‘apart for ladies bad plain tops; as the yello

of gold, a8 it wore,

‘Tho heat was £0 grout that it affected the t

0, onusing their tops to wither. Frurta—
pip. of agra a denom, from fag ‘one who indicates’ (awe).
weaemmet—erdi we, TT AE: TANT: the holder of water,
a cloud; #0 there is’ an apparent tautology here; but qeac is
a word ezin the sense of any cloud, fall-of-water or empty
(according to poetic ideas). xrerafit—ael aeeifit eta
Wt st C6: ) wit Terat aw: an artiGeial hillock in a garden
for sport. | ataré—dee dievar av:

81,15. wrarey—ererme was a village in the. country
of Vatea, near Magadha, Somo read eres, but ererore is th
correct name of the city as will appear from gear rare
em: ae Sear qte a) cde Aree fF Fredisier ev Kathi-
tar, RV, 119. Prof. Ray quotes tho following from Bhéan, £0
verity thie—araror gaaga gare at oie femamits
Feeqarft iy whore the metre will not admit the form rem
For tho allusion #00 #ifva, note on wre af@a.<irtrgqeant p. ALL)

fe TH ataeeey eryr—Tho ‘sudden’ sinouncement’ of the!

) it@alled - ap to; the King’s’ mind ‘the past * oocutretca’ af



--- Page 295 (OCR) ---
Act IV. J ua

Laviguke, and in the heat of the agitation be thought that
‘Visavadattd was sotually borat, though eho was then by bie
side, Tho student will ee farther on that the iro was bat
the mngician’s trick, employed by Yanga. as the best moans
to procaro tho roleste of Saga. and to get her identity dls-
Closed in tho presence of the King and the Queen,

P, 104, statar——tearfrar(e. 2) p. ps p.of gr Lat Con}. with
‘qq it bas the tame moaning as egq. sfarreat—Hero sy has the
Tense of stmqreeq j ‘when there is no grave cause for it; for
such a slight reason; itdocs not mean ‘without cause.” qapEta:=
qi bebaviour, mode of action. The moth throws itself
houdlong into a fame and perishes.

ead qfreqr—The Vide. boing on perfectly familiar
torms with the King takes hold of his upper gurment; Vasubh.
and Babhravya oould only respectfully remonstrate, rwenf®
cqrot: &9,—This speooh onght to be aaar4.

81, 16. gargara—s continuove flow of smoke. mer
a clreling mass of; spreite saR eit fr. ww bert OTC aT):
or eP%r ara: a cireular mast Ge

P. 105. spvaafird—done with a firm or resolute mind.
qegitanoe sada: Gon. Tat. j 4. ¢. 1 willalso enter freand
die before you. Bome think that the objection to compounds
in sig is not universal, as Pap. himself aaye stag: wo: and
merdiagy Baa. eguifaae:—For, it was his beliot that the
Drinoess bad perished, R@e—ty is emphatic; he hed. already

tap his mind to die and not to show his faca aguin to the,
ing of Bimhala, without Sigariké, So he thinks that this
‘was. tho best occasion to carry out, his resolve, sreircy—
saegit's. 1 for such a trifling matter. yen —For Odayaua
belonged to Bharate’é vate. daagat—in the balance of doubt
bout its existence, i.e. doubt in one scale, woighed sgainst the
Goutiinity of the race ia the othery it bolng’ sot known
‘which wotld outwolgh the dtber. i

qarqe—i- #. within the reach, of fife.” earearta— Lit,

dulowt (oy helping), eto, hdlp,attond fo, Of em. rtcedte Mf

Sebrccate: | cing Gurr, | BRE, TP 31. sn Se

‘gsa, whea you ought to be bartying ‘about'to got ont. of the”
Fenth Of fire! avaeuaas—indidierent fo” your ‘atoty.
B, 106., siraigy—Tho Hi

FA engroce Ba



--- Page 296 (OCR) ---
cr}

of calling him siriga when speaking to he
bbad no detire to livo, as is clear from ber previous epecch
‘wal—Speaking aloud, she addresses bim in the ueual style,

SI. 18. am: start—~For hor touch deprives the fire
ofits bursing powe

81. 19. gaav—gaex tg: the carrier of oblations to
the godt, fire; of. a. safeae—For Vasav. had entored the
apartment and gone to tho pleos where the King was,

P. 107, eit aft &e.—For bat a moment ago the whole
partment wat a soene of destruction; suddenly the fre vanishet
and everything appeared in ite original state; was that «
dream ?

va erraara &.—The King now found bimeelf in an
awkward position; he was rather in a burry to go to the
sorene of Bigarikt, when thero wore others at hand to go. 80
he tries to pats off tho matter by eaying this. The Qi
sreiloe at his de ironically «Yee, I know it,”
trergsar:—srrfi having tho sense of goa is constraod with the
Instr. or Gen. by gearttagionrat adraeaateag) ge: eee:
‘eat 1 Brorey Geng a1 | Bid.-Ke

P. 108, graftar—Seo com. for derivation, ariftta—
‘The reader knows that Yau, had done all that on bis own
responsibility; see eupra I. 8 (eewrendt ofa quilt wg).

feetireegt—For sho was in chains at that time. ‘The
ight was too much for the faithful and tendor-heartod
minister to boar, and be falls down overpowered by emotion.
wa@pyheatt &o —For ho was liko a father to. he

wagtrataea &o,—Tho King is agreoubly surprised to
find that abe who was a0 long considered as of an bumble origin
wat a princess,

P, 109. afew wreif®-Attor this Prof. Ray adds
tho stege-direction—sfa waatat weareefieos uniai@, with the
remark——Tho jester here docs what is most natural.’ If thie

t only brings into greater reliet the nobility of
the Vids mind already diaplayed by him when offering tle
rearest to the King, although he was expressly told that it was
prevented to him by Ségarik’. See our remark on srqy 4
we aa do, p. 91,

wentcrar-Het feult lay tn’ impersonating Visavadatis
‘and going to mest the King, sfeifayt-Booanse au she thought



--- Page 297 (OCR) ---
—

8

of heart not to toll her (the Queen’) that
she was related to het, Ratntvall, however, did not know
anything herself about the relationship, until it was announced
by abard in Act. that she was in the household of King
Udeyana, and even after that she could not tell it ont of
modesty; of. wom aif II. 1. ggrdin® arga—So in Priya.
oe oefiwal® 1 eartint  ateteag atta. ead areca —
‘This draws the Queen’s attention to Sig.’s being in chains,
geteaar—Scil, her putting Sag. into fotters, 3% ria destroys
a gaiw:, honeo, erucl; gefgeq wre: getaat. staremdite gate
‘Farfer—She know that in her jealous pride sho did not treat
Séga, in a manner worthy of a Queen. She now tries to find
& defence for her ill-troatmont of Séga. by saying that
Yang. was responatble for th

41.20. Year near, &e.—This refers to Yaugandhard-
yagu’s attempt to bringabout afamily-alliance between Vatea-
rija and the powerful King of Magadha, who had a beautiful
daughter named Padmévat, But this was not possible a0
long as Vésavadattt lived, as Padmavati’s father did not
like that his daughter should hold a secondary position in the
King’s household, Yauga,, therefore, persuaded Vasa
atti to snffor, for stato purpones, a tomporary separation
from her bueband, and while the royal household was at
Lvénaka, sot Gre Lo the royal camp, while the King was ont
a-hunting. The post, however, makes mention of this incident
in connexion with Batnavali.

wasetaeqar—Some read geaMINERT ReeUEERe ot
auftar. ‘The ax mont here of course, Ratnavall,
although the original reference is to Padmévati, According
to the plot of the play Ratndvalf was to be the second wife
of the King, but the Queen did not yet know that Sige, was
that Ratndvalf, and that ber union with the King was
imminent,

P. 110, ere enritererrn:—Yaug, spenks of Udayena’s
acquisition of universal sovereignty, after sis marriage with
Ratndvali, as almost an accomplished fact, a0 firm was his
holieg in the propheoy.

‘yeaens—For comp. s00, com, firarqe—He meant——In
fhe loyal, discharge of oxe’s duty towards the master, one
fganngt allow, considerations of tha feolings, of others, howayer
Teapegtable, to come in,one’s way. bi

BMT



--- Page 298 (OCR) ---
“ [ Act Iv.

‘Wr aruarT—Some add before this the stagedireotion
arqavves; but that is derogatory to the dignity of the prime
ninister; again, if genuine, we expect something like ay rq
or afte in tho following specoh of the King. ardita:—
ah: Fae: tact ea,

‘P, LLL. sytr Greet &o——A similar quostion is asked
in the Svap.—Va's.—srq osraeal Be Fi FarewTeag. (Free 1)
safterrararet &o.-~This is a hint to the Queen that sho should
give hor sistor in marriage to tho King. In Jivinands’s Ea,
‘his part of the epocoh is assigned to the King, with a corres-
ponding change in the following speoches of Visava, and the
Vidi., viz. —stsrst.-5E UE aq...1 fego—fereT afte.
‘But the speech is appropriate in Yaugs,’s lips alone, as it
iuxal that the suggestion should come from him. To put
it in the mouth of the King is to go against propriety and
make bim forget his dignity.

P, 119. afefaete—In the absence of her ( Ratnévall’s)
parents she was entitled to give hor away like that, ait tear:
are: &o.—i. o. waite ae Ta auTaATY (80 this one also
is reeoived with respect ). awur ge d&e.—C/. for similar
roguoate err At Reeruadt wegoraatrwetiat a waft rar Faster 1 Gtk.
TL p. 79; cera 8 frqeet artes esse ver earls sere
Vik. IL p.87. guft wg &e—Besaute the gaining of tho
hand of Batntvall meant tho gaining of supremacy over the
whole world. eat eterey &o.—Vasa, was struck with the
magnanimity of the Quoen who gave Ratnévall to the King
without betraying tho least sign of jealousy, In some
editions this spoooh is given as Babhravys’s; but is suita
abhéti better. Some read after this—arenqut cearedi~
anferiea Reteegar wart WET |. ITAT ere e—Some attribute the
speeeh to Twa; s00 foot-note; some read 3¥ tard a
aitam: dew. fagenet—This use of gus is somewhat
strange ; but it bas bocome toohnica|, as it is found in almost
all the plays. Perhaps it means aq wit #tift bring near to,
confer j of suguf® the variant in Sik,

G1. 21, Mer: strewernat—Zit, made like my own wolf, He
‘moané—By the msrriage-ti a firm ally is soourod in Vikra,
who wotld henceforth regard my interest as identical with his,
srreas may alto inodn ‘raised to our rank,’ but it will. nel’ do

F that is an advantage to Vikra. and not to the speaker.



--- Page 299 (OCR) ---
Act IV. ] ®
miitd—Eigar. is not diamissod 10 summarily; three
opithets are used to point out her importance, vie, afin ls
eareaweg: and fret ( loved by me ).

B.S, fig afta caf Sof arma Fd 0. 1. who
{Ait moans ‘what is to bo accomplished, an objeat to be gained.’

srareaqe?—Bee note on age: p. 3.

aaqTay—This is a stage-direetion. It reters to the oon-
cluding éloks (or flokas ) of a play, so called booause, like
the Nandi, itis repeated by wre or the chief actor, divested of
is dramatic character, as all soting is over. -rcamenreararat
maevwarneres wewsteatireg ee: | Righavabbatta on Sik, It
contains an expression of with for general prosperity, &o.

SI, 22. ggrq—Of luxuriant growth, abundant. areq:
This is variously oxplained a¢ gg: sued gure oF Fe Ba:
eh COUP aT ores ae Efe 5 SEMTENTCT, Tndra, the god of
the firmament and the dispenser of rain; of. ae wag feéter:
sreeg(@: sore | Sk. VIL 84, eine desired;

much af is neces

quia, the aff. 7 being added to qu, ait ( to form an abstract
noun); distingaish this from the proceding, get, whore w is
added eff (to form p. p. p. ).  ¥Pyerat:—The gods;
frt—This is done by offering oblations to them; ef.
sersvaiPe iar greed syomifeai: | Bhg, IL 12, This is the
yrvioe the gods expect from mortals in return for the favour
trom heaven; of. raft feaaast afar (raf: v. 2.) sinerer #
Sek. VIE, 94. erargeeat: V. Z-—will do equally woll it will bo
cloar from the quotation above and Ragh. T, 26 &e,, that it
was the duty of kings also to offer sacrifice to gods through
‘Bribmana priests,

srrageared—weu is the poriod of the world’s duration,

Tt extends over one thousand oyoles of tho four gut

2 is better to take the gq as reforring to tho
people at Iarge, and not to good mon alone, ‘This same dl
fooours as the conclding stanza of the Priya, with the
readings fearagefwat (feat steady qrét agefear grown,
developed ) daft: for eyefemee: Grm:, and gayi: for goa:
in tho third and fourth lines. qsfar:—diffioult to be. put
down by argument. qar@at:—aarvg like a diamond or the
thunderbolt, wfea: hard Gar: atet loaving s permanent ( pain
{ful ) impression on the mind. yar@q alo means a kind of



--- Page 300 (OCR) ---
™ [ Act Lv.

‘coment, 0 called because things joined with it adhere perma.
nontly; for its preparation see Byibatsam, Ch, 675 this meaning
leo will do; aiare ex feat: SHBGT:-

‘The third and fourth lines are
sueet aes: frees geteeoermear Anat cemedd
eaaaanaiaize aiesreg | Oonstroo—ga%: of the great post
‘afweift: (the fame arising from the good composition, the
play) srsed Frerag (shine forth, endure ); gragETCett (Tea
charming wat acacradineacramrdiat qari dosds year wear:
agit) ed aan ened aieer UEOTTET ATG: aut (that
‘which eauses to dance, bound with joy, henco, the delightor of )
seg. Another variant ie—sresard Ararg-a: Ageia —
mag weld vad wea AMeINER! RgrTteaaeR-
yom u. But the meaning of this is not clear,

so differently rosd as—



--- Page 301 (OCR) ---
sii

<a

71

APPENDICES.
No. L
The subha’shitas occurring in the play.

£0

(Phe figures refer to the pay

of thia edition ),

1, SENTENOES,

Page
coffer A aftinedreciat aT 1 39
Fase gia | 80
waist aE WATE | 8
§% gu: exefesrat goernt # dares t 8
gover ee TUR | 58
a womeret voltueat erogeramntaeR | 2
sapeen fom: eateran tenet Ba | 1
werd Teas! 68
UL. SLOKAS,

ater: ered

aed erat warew 1
ath ara Pra

paolorarrtt Rae: 0 pet?
geht genurceral rere

wifey erated et RAT
age: trageniteitre

erarat seroma faeare th pp. 4844
aoreraerett

mwarette se AUTE AT Sea
rte wart Veet

ffaiiaaatreetar: & pT



--- Page 302 (OCR) ---
No. IL,
The Metres Used in the Play, Their
Definitions and Schemes.

1, Sanskrit Vorso is rogulated by quantity, snd not, as
in English, by aocent. Aga (stanza) consists usually of
four args (quarters), A. arg is rogulated either by the number
of syllables ( srqvs ), oF of syllabic instants ( armys). Wh
the grgs are all similar, it is called a eq gq, to which typo
most of the metres conform; there aro stam gut, wherein
tho first quarter corresponds with the third, and the second
with the fourth, called respectively the odd ( feam ) and exon
(am) quarters. A third olass comprises fax yas, but these
are very seldom used,

2, The vowels a, % 3, snd a are short, and the rest
Jong, ‘The quantity of a syllable is determined by its vowel.
A syllable with a short vowol is called ay ( light ),’ anda
syllable with a long vowsl is called ge ‘(heavy ),’ Butagy
syllable is considered as ge it {tis followed by an anusvdra,
nga, OF & conjunct consonant, or when it comes at the
end of ag.

8. A act of threo succossive syllables is called a qo
(foot), Marking a short syllable as ~ and a long one ae—,
tho different qu? which sro Sin number, may be exhibited
as tollown— qv — 3-4 —5 9 — +; H =~:
aY = ~5UY~ 5H = ~j and q ~~~, In the definitions
which are given below, a short syllable is indiosted by the
letter a and a long one by m.

4, Exoopting nine stanzas (I, 18, 14, 15; 11.1, 7% IV. 7,
89,10) of Prakrit vorse, tho Ratuivall’ has 78 stansas,
distributed over 13 different metres, which wo give below
arranged in the alphabetical order of their names, ‘The
metre is also named in the oom, in this edition, exoopt in the
cate of stagH.
lagers stig Reef + aette |
veh datogiey ser rants a 0

2 onftreareertg eC-ar af rT |
sesear thet afte wat a TOATITT I



--- Page 303 (OCR) ---
——

_—

Bi ie all

0

‘MaqH—( also called seg). Det. aie 9 ug Ht via ay
wart | ferauetineg vad giweaa: au. This is the
shortest metre in ordinary use, There are many varieties of
this metre, but the one defined is the most common, Bach
Péda ot it consists of 8 syllables of which tho this long
and the 5th short, and the 7th is short in the second and fourth
‘padas and long in the first and third. ‘The rest of the syllables
may be either short or long, Heamplae:—I. 22; II. 6, 10,
13; IIL. 2, 16; LV. 4, 16, 18,

srat—Det, gear: gait oi gree ararevaT gael | stare
facta wqGe wage arssaiu. This belongs to the olass of
metres which are rogulated by the number of ayars or syllabie
instants, The four pédas contain respectively 12, 18, 12,
and 16 mrays, Ex.—I. 6, 19, 21, 24; IE, 12, 19; TIT. 10,12,

[ xeeve—Seo eaaift below J.

arent —Det. [eafteqesn aft Aleit a: istexea saarent
Dn) seeadtditewerat aa adtareoneven: wee
fearearertt fitwarg wafer onfaergte atau. An avenit is 8
mixture of ono or more pidas of grzeart{ 11 syllables, Boh
<a, %) 1}, with ono ormore of etequatt[ 11 syllables,
Schome—ai, G; % 1, 7], 80 a8 to form one stanza, a mixture
of other metzes algo, in this manner, is oalled an gyai@. ‘The
student should sonn and find ont in onch oase whether a phda
Is in gegqeat or ateqamr. Examplos:—IL. 15 (go zo ge and f+).

[ strexasi—Soo sqeritt above J.

gforara—Det. sgh agieedt vert gfe saat orem
gftversr |. ‘This is an sam metro; the first and third pades
consist each of 12 syllables (Scheme—a, 2, ¢, 1) and tho seoond
and fourth pAdan consist ( Sohome—
HH) HG)» Bsamples—. 4,

gout —Det. wiht rarer wgueattet Tet ge: |. 17 Syllables,
Bchome—et B® BG mA. The pau
syllable, Bxomples:—II. 16; IV. 17.

aufttt—Det. a sit afererait: vefteftaqs. 13 Syllables.
Sohome—x, st, G t, ‘Tho panso ocours aftor the third
syllable, He.—IT. 8.

arftrfi—Det. arqagte ante sifreaite: 1. 16 Syllables
Boh, 4, ma, ‘The paaso ooours after the eighth
syllable, Re.—IT. 14; IIT. 17; TV. 10.

|
;
|



--- Page 304 (OCR) ---
cD)

tavaiemr—Det. swt sweater CHon oih wl. 1d
Spllablos, Sob.—a, % Hs, ¥. Bs—I 8, 12, 20; TL, 17;
IHL. 6, 145 1V. 2, 8, 19.

aidaPrsifea—Det. qa'hy a: oat aaa: engatsiveay 1.
10 Syllables, Soh—A, & 5, BM 8% The pause oovars
after the twoltth syllable, This metre is vory frequently

in this play. Be—t. 1, 25,9, 11,17, 23,25; IL. 8,

4,5, 11,21; IIT, 1, 8, 11, 18, 18,19) IV. 1,'6, 12, 20, 21,
And the additional stenze after 1. 2,

curfielt—Det. ait ait earth teats 1.
Schome--m, q) mM, M. Tho pause ooours after the fourth
syllable, Bs.—L. 7.

Paafef—Det. e& skikgar aaaanere: firaftdt i 17
Syllables, Soh—q, 9, 4, €, %, Bm, The pause occurs after
‘the sixth syllable, Ba.—II, 18, 20; IIL, 4, 7, 16; IV. 18,

srar—Det, ataiat sor fegitafagararad PARE I. 21
Syllables, Scheme—y, %, ¥; 4, 4% ¥, a The pauses ooour
after the soventh and tho foartesnth syllables. This is
the longest motre in ordinary ufo. Hs—I,8, 10, 16; IL 2
IIL, 5, 8 1V, 5, 11, 14, 28,

efh—Det, awacaet a: e¥Ae4@ftoN war |. 17 Syllables.
8 4%) GS) BM. ‘Tho pauses ooour attor the
sixth and the tenth syllables. H2.—III. 9,



--- Page 305 (OCR) ---
81

No, UL
Bombay University Examination Papers,
(JV. B.—Questions repeated are omitted ).

B.A, 1875-16.
TL. To what lass of dramatic composition does the
ali belong ? What are the charsotoriatics of that elacs ?
 skotsh of charactor of the Vidishaks in the
Ratnivali, with quotations or roferoncas, omparo it with
tho charastor of the Vid. in any other Sanskrit drama,
t IIL. (@) Translate the following :—~( ss the passage from

Reece are: SterarfaAeh Mo. p. OBaveasvrto tho ond of él 6,
p94). (D) Dissolve and name the compounds gugeaeziferenta:,
sxgraeait@, snd etigagiatt. IV. Explain tho following,
giving the context : (0) wararafutatiroren weat arm: Pert: wit
865 (B StemaysaeT eo... tte P45; (0) TOTTTR P-
@ ween Ron: eaterattnet fe aft B. 77.

¥ —

Firat Exam, in Arts, 1879-80,

I. ‘Translate into English:—(o) wyitia &. Tl. 20;
© sweaters to, TV. 2 5 (6) arg fifeq &o, TV. 5, IL. Fully exe
plain thefollowing, stating the oontext in exch ease :—(a) sireat

few geemfiranit 1 p. 675 (6) arene armerTeengt Peeraiseta |
4 p25; (0) aareed wears Cares; (@) safes orgeTT | aie

ceraoreraqueresTeaear:(p. 101; () war meqantteat Fat BPE
aft ranted ora: 1p. 275 Cf) safe Rage eraatteteg wats 1
@ san amieran sream TERE oe A NRTA |
p. 70; (A) RR qeenfreute Bargermaest |p. 83.
TIL, In what senso or is the word yi@ uted in the
| Ratnavall ? Quote the passages if you osu. IV. Write out

{fully the versos in whioh any two of the following lines ooear;
BF it you cannot quote the verner, indlonte their context —
© crateact SeaeM aerate Fe wR p.70; () fra ATR
rqairignagiige p. 645 (©) erierremaa: goraft mille At
free; @ eek cif ass vet ON A Tara. V. What
$ do you know of the geographical position of Kauddmbi
4 Js King Udayana mentioned in any other book you have rend ?



--- Page 306 (OCR) ---
82

Provious Exam, 1907, |

I, Translate into English:—(1) 0k geared &o. IT,
@) qe gait &o, IT, 7 and (8) geaint Bra &o, IV.
TL Esplein:—(a) ggsiite sea agraga (p. 19); (4) ger.
siewfeerg (p. 98); (¢) waa carrefee a areg te |
(p45) (4) ermzera ceareee (p. 55); (6) Aarerat wera |

|

(8.64) (S) aaaat wets geet % Cp. 63s (g) WE aT mE
ater Gea (p. 74); and (A) seabaiieg or 0. 1. ualiingy
(p45), IIL, Name and discolve:—sremgarf@fwerm ( p. 44);
sraeureareefi (G19 p. AT); onkerat (p. 86 Harel ( p. 86 js
waretett (arg p. 72); and giiermurre (p.98). IV. Name
‘the metres and point out the pause (ara) in—(1) gafet
werUCaat wea I. 8 2) ateeRsrerreniidt gear I. 9,
(3) menamarahtuetainwnrten: T. 20; and (4) stemeaieart
‘eigaatgar a TIL. 17.



--- Page 307 (OCR) ---
No. IV.

Index of Important Words.
( The figures refer to the pages of this edition ).

ER

aferte ( verb )
create
erat
a5
saa
sara
Sal

31 | ane 98
36 | sree 83
86 | fare 59, 82
105 | suftaen

) ait
15, 82 | ararez (verb )

19 | snag ( verb ) 8
88 | orara 27
20 | Sree 26
ul) & 3
15 | waste 107
83 | & ( verb ) 96
104 | de 1
70) 8
72 ‘gay ( verb ) 22, 76
66 3
TT) sf 36
86 xen 38
82, 102 | aga od
an | 32, 66
9a, ag | 30% ( verb) 69, 72
28, 48
9g | STF ft
96 | os
35) 582
94 | gee 108
35, 64) smeq (verb ) se”
23) a 11, 18, 38) 348



--- Page 308 (OCR) ---
84,

ae 96 | we 12
we 78, 79 | wera 24
aod 94 | ea 7
am (verb ) 42, 112 | fara 66, 99
oe ait wb
se, 44 | xe 12
awa (20, 21, 22, 23 | wer 16
area 3 | as 99, 107
aaa 78 | sg 19
eet 76 | oe 100
eat 10 | siete 51
away ( verb ) 81 | 43
ene 3am 46
arr 49 | aie 21, 64
7 43 |i 99
a8 58, 62 |r 108
war 86, 100 | "aC verb ) 58
was 85 | sea( verb ) 7,70
od 45,65 | "at 98
eae 78 | wa 89
ent 2,89 | gaat 58
bibs 9 7 | es €6
AST 32 | were 85, 104
‘wea ( verb ) 84 | agitea, 42
oar 94 | wate 9,11, 13,16
Fereoh 35 | after 28
‘fea 36 | araft 23
Sad 82 | feenfet 61, 70
sin 12, 69 | fq (verb) 56, 64, 70
al 36 | aa 14
FT ( verb) 42 | ong 84
= 112 | dies 447
sara 9 | get 88
= 35 Rae 7
Rigea 12 | sree q4



--- Page 309 (OCR) ---
|

Cy
anita,
aa ( verb)
ares
fae (verb )
we
ais
area
fed
Yet
fey,
A
afer
Rese
afer
a
erior
a,
HeaEg
Rewgea
after
aa
al
aac
afte
aad
was
ae
feat
we
sr
at
a
fans
RNS

85

48 [fea
64, 86 | xia
14 | ater
50 | Regs
(8 | freae
105 | ficier
6 | Pric
62 | Fam ( verb )
47 | fale ( verb )
zis | ae
1g | Peta,
8 | Perare
90 | Fever
40 | Bere
36 | fg ( verb )
62 | ter
82 | gwar
15 | ges
17, 107 | gana
12 | gatas
34 | ager
108 | ai
88 | afte
43 | afer
83 | atwox
TT | ate
97 | aftat ( verb )
29, 87 | altwe
14, 16 | aftarfter,
45 | afte
12 | aie
8,10, 92 | aera
LL | anfitsrget
104, 105 | are

103
103

6
91,110
20

43

15, 72, 89
46

72

84

40

27, 74
8

47



--- Page 310 (OCR) ---
oes 1) Reer 94
ort 27, 84 | sree 12
set 68 | area 9
Rios 95, 97 | a8 108
Patter 11 | oe 8
Pree 68 | 67, 68, 108
ga 40,113 | "ae ar
Rata 108 pee in
am 3
pion oy [ae 92
een 94/8 “
cd 1,2 | ee i
poke 93 | Pe 9, 66
ae 77 | Bee 24
sara 53 | FRG 23
afmey (verb) 85, 111 | Far 2
sftare ( verb aes 49
eee) bed 15, 28, 48
sir 108 | 7 81
after ( verb ) 29 | FA (verb ) 34
poe oa | Fat 35
wax (verb) 25, 26,98 | RT €9
em 24 | ae ul
seaftat (verb ) 41 | Fa" 69
reat 8 | me 9
ra 8, 70 | Rea 75, 78
RTA 88 | Farmer 43
sara 67 | Rae 108
see 61, 96 | Hera, 9
sha 5, 111 | RF ( verb ) 15 |
ae 86, 108 | area 45,
ary 59 | arto 89
er 87 | agate 14
3 ( verb ) 97 | ee 11, 51



--- Page 311 (OCR) ---
aa
afies
Freee
mE
Bouter
ae

cd

84, $0 | are
71, 74 | after
96 | Fang
34 | firora

66 | Pera

16, 36 | Rare

32, 76

40, 73
18

55
68
13
69
53
26



--- Page 312 (OCR) ---
fqoa il
feaa 57, 64, 83, 88
an

ame

oe

eu

aura

rg ( verb ) 40
‘aq ( verb ) 97,61
wz ( verb ) 108 |
= 112
a 64
weg 12
req ( verb ) 15
Poem 94
frag 63
Fe 11,13
ae 12, 98
same 103
vars 20
* 54
sen 64
ag 101
il 68
a 66
aha 6
deer 109
= 7, 21, 25
aft 60

88

aie
sate ( verb )

wt
we

or
93

30

26

8

67

ML
51,77
2

5
22
14, 19, 97

31

3

8

12

68

8

64

u

17, 26
16,71, 74
15, 74
48.

48

5

93
105
BD

|
|


